Alternative D
1. The Federal Open Market Committee decided today to keep its target for the federal
funds rate at 1 percent.
2. Reflecting in part the intensification of the financial strains earlier in the fall, the pace
of economic activity appears to have slowed further, and the near-term outlook for
growth has deteriorated. Moreover, the downside risks are significant. However, policy
actions taken in recent months, including reductions in short-term interest rates to very
low levels, extraordinary liquidity measures, and official steps to strengthen the financial
system, should help over time to improve credit conditions and promote a return to
moderate economic growth. As announced previously, the Federal Reserve will purchase
a large volume of agency debt and mortgage-backed securities to provide support to the
mortgage and housing markets and thus to broader economic activity. Early next year,
the Federal Reserve will also implement the Term Asset-Backed Securities Loan Facility
to help facilitate the extension of credit to households and small businesses.
3. In light of the declines in the prices of energy and other commodities and the weaker
prospects for economic activity, the Committee expects inflation to moderate in coming
quarters to levels consistent with price stability.
4. In view of the large volume of reserves provided by the Federal Reserve’s various
liquidity facilities, the Committee recognizes that the federal funds rate is likely to
average significantly below the target rate for some time. The Committee will monitor
economic and financial developments carefully in light of recent policy actions and will
act as needed to promote sustainable economic growth and price stability.
 
alternatives point to the recent announcements that the Federal Reserve will purchase
large volumes of agency debt and mortgage-backed securities and will implement the
Term Asset-Backed Securities Loan Facility (TALF). Alternatives A, B, and C also
explicitly refer to the possibility of further using the Federal Reserve’s balance sheet to
support financial markets and economic activity, including by purchasing Treasury
securities.
(29) If the Committee agrees that the economic outlook has deteriorated
significantly since the October meeting and thinks that substantial monetary stimulus
will be needed to support a recovery in economic activity, it may be inclined to favor
Alternative A or Alternative B. Members may be disappointed by a forecast, such as
the one presented in this Greenbook, in which economic activity contracts severely
this quarter and in the first half of next year and recovers only slowly after that, even
with a federal funds rate at 25 basis points through 2010 and with substantial fiscal
stimulus. Accordingly, Committee members may feel that even stronger policy action
than what is assumed in the Greenbook will be necessary to promote a return to
sustainable economic growth. Regarding the outlook for inflation, the Committee
may be concerned that the projected sharp contraction in economic activity, coupled
with the striking ongoing decline in the prices of energy and other commodities, may
cause inflation to fall to an uncomfortably low level, perhaps even lower than
projected in the staff forecast (as in the “Lower Inflation” alternative scenario in the
Greenbook). In these circumstances, Committee members may thus wish to take a
bold action at this meeting to counter the risk of deflation, and they may also want to
presage further expansions of the Federal Reserve’s balance sheet.
(30) Against this backdrop, the Committee may decide not to announce a target
for the federal funds rate at this meeting and signal instead that its focus has shifted to
the use of the Federal Reserve’s balance sheet as an especially important policy tool
going forward, as in Alternative A. The Federal Reserve’s balance sheet has already
 
expanded considerably in recent months and will continue to expand in the immediate
future as the Federal Reserve begins to purchase agency debt and mortgage-backed
securities in volume, as already announced, and as the TALF becomes operational.
Federal funds have often traded below 50 basis points since the October meeting
even with the current target of 1 percent. In the last week, with the anticipation of
further policy easing at this meeting, federal funds have traded persistently below
10 basis points. Members may thus view a shift away from interest rate targeting and
towards balance sheet management as essentially already under way. Committee
members may also be mindful that announcing a target that is not possible to achieve
may create the impression that Federal Reserve policy is ineffective, even though
powerful tools remain at the Committee’s disposal to address the deteriorating
economic and financial situation.
(31) One such tool is communication. As incorporated in the third paragraph of
Alternative A, the Committee could explicitly state that it anticipates that short-term
interest rates will remain low for some time. Members may be reluctant to enter into
an unconditional commitment because they may feel that such a commitment would
be too constraining should they need to tighten policy sooner than now expected. To
mitigate this concern, the Committee could phrase the commitment in implicitly
conditional terms by indicating its anticipation that “weak economic conditions are
likely to warrant federal funds rates near zero for some time,” as suggested in the
statement accompanying Alternative A.10 In addition, if members were concerned
that even increased use of the Federal Reserve’s balance sheet as a policy tool and a
10 The Committee may feel that a commitment that is conditioned on too precise a set of
events may also be undesirable because, in the future, a need to tighten policy may arise well
before those specific events materialize. The proposed sentence makes clear in broad terms
that the commitment is not unconditional (because the expectation of very low rates is based
on “weak economic conditions”), but at the same time the condition is cast in terms broad
enough that it likely will not constrain the Committee’s future decisions. The length of the
commitment (“for some time”) is described in similarly broad terms for the same reason.
 
commitment to keep interest rates low for some time might not be sufficient to
counter deflationary pressures, the Committee could explicitly state, as indicated in
the bracketed sentence, that it will seek to achieve a rate of inflation of about
2 percent in the medium term, in order to buoy inflation expectations. Higher
inflation expectations, in turn, would reduce real interest rates and so support
economic activity.
(32) The statement suggested for Alternative A begins by acknowledging the
further weakening of the outlook for economic activity rather than with a sentence
about the federal funds rate. This departure from the standard structure of the
FOMC statement is intended both to emphasize that the focus of the Committee has
shifted away from the target federal funds rate and to provide a clear rationale for that
shift. The second paragraph notes the weakening of inflationary pressures and the
risk that inflation could decline for a time below rates that best foster economic
growth and price stability. As noted above, members may wish to conclude that
paragraph with the sentence, “In support of its dual mandate, the Committee will seek
to achieve a rate of inflation, as measured by the price index of personal consumption
expenditures, of about 2 percent in the medium term.” By using the words “seek to
achieve” and “in the medium term,” the Committee would acknowledge that it may
not be possible to maintain inflation at the desired level over the specified period, but
the statement would nonetheless signal the Committee’s policy objective. If members
were uncomfortable with taking such a step at this meeting, they could simply omit
that sentence from the statement. The third paragraph notes the Committee’s
decision not to set a specific target for the federal funds rate, acknowledges that the
federal funds rate has already declined to very low levels, and states the expectations
that federal funds rate will remain near zero for some time. The statement goes on in
paragraph 4 to indicate a shift of the Committee’s focus from the target rate to the use
of the Federal Reserve’s balance sheet. That paragraph repeats a number of measures
 
that have already been announced but not (or only partially) implemented, thereby
emphasizing that a number of unconventional policy actions are already forthcoming,
and foreshadows the possibility that the Federal Reserve will purchase longer-term
Treasury securities if conditions warrant. The intention to continue to actively
consider policies that employ the Federal Reserve’s balance sheet is also explicitly
stated in order to clarify that other tools could also be used if needed to support credit
markets and economic activity.
(33) While expectations of next week’s policy action are difficult to discern from
market quotes because of the continued expected softness in the federal funds rate,
the Desk’s survey suggests that most primary dealers see a 50 basis point reduction in
the target federal funds rate as the most likely outcome of the December meeting, and
that a majority sees ½ percent as the trough for the target federal funds rate this cycle.
As a result, a decision to move away from interest rate targeting and to let federal
funds fluctuate somewhere in the vicinity of the zero bound will likely surprise
investors. Short-term interest rates will decline, but probably not by much,
considering that they are already very low and that federal funds are already trading at
rates well below ¼ percent. Stock prices may rise if investors read the decision to
move away from targeting the level of the federal funds rate and concentrate on use
of the balance sheet as underscoring the Federal Reserve’s determination to promote
a rapid return to sustainable economic growth. The foreign exchange value of the
dollar will likely decline somewhat. Judging from the Desk’s survey, some market
participants may be surprised by the reference to unconventional policies in the
statement. And the indication that the federal funds rate could remain near zero for
some time could lead investors to mark down their expected path for policy in 2009
and beyond. As a result of these influences, longer-term interest rates should move
lower, although the size of that decline may be muted because the purchases of
agency and mortgage-backed securities have already been announced and the
 
Chairman raised the possibility of purchases of large quantities of Treasury securities
in a recent speech.
(34) If the Committee shares the staff view that the economic outlook has
deteriorated markedly and thinks that, given the circumstances, moving the federal
funds rate near the zero bound on nominal interest rates is desirable, but it wants to
continue to provide an explicit target for the federal funds rate, then it might choose
to establish a target range of 0 to ¼ percent as in Alternative B. Continuing to set a
target that encompasses very low federal funds rates would not compromise the
Committee’s ability to resort to unconventional policy measures. In addition, some
members may be concerned that switching to the use of the Federal Reserve’s balance
sheet as its main policy tool could delay a return to a more conventional monetary
policy based on interest rate targeting because some unconventional policy measures
(such as the purchases of long-term assets) may not be easy or cheap to unwind
quickly. Consequently, members may feel that maintaining a target range, however
low, could be desirable because it may make a return to more traditional monetary
policy simpler and more straightforward once economic and financial conditions
improve. In addition, Committee members may see the maintenance of a federal
funds target as advantageous from a governance perspective, since the determination
of the target rate is a prerogative of the Committee, whereas the Committee and the
Board both have separate authorities that can be used to affect the composition and
size of the Federal Reserve’s balance sheet.
(35) Achieving exactly a zero effective federal funds rate may be impossible since
there would be no incentive for depository institutions to sell funds without
compensation. It may even be undesirable, given the strains that it could put on some
financial institutions and financial markets. On the other hand, members may feel
that the direct monetary stimulus obtained by bringing the target rate to a very low
but positive level, along with the increased flexibility thereby provided to use
 
nonconventional policy actions, outweighs the associated costs. As in Alternative A,
the Committee may also be concerned that the sharp contraction in economic activity
and the steep declines in the prices of energy and other commodities may cause
inflation to fall to an uncomfortably low level. In such circumstances, conditional on
their desire to maintain a federal funds rate target, Committee members may prefer to
make that target as low as possible immediately, rather than making a more gradual
adjustment, to counter the risk of further severe deterioration in economic and
financial conditions.
(36) The rationale section of the statement under Alternative B begins by noting
the recent deterioration in economic conditions and in the outlook for economic
activity. The statement is also explicit as to the reduction in inflationary pressures and
notes the risks that inflation could decline for a time below levels that best foster
economic growth and price stability in the longer term. The fourth paragraph makes
clear the intention to use all tools at the Committee’s disposal to promote the
resumption of sustainable economic growth and to preserve price stability. Some of
these tools—the already announced purchases of agency debt and mortgage-backed
securities, the possible expansion of those purchases, the possibility of beginning to
purchase longer-term Treasury securities, the implementation of the TALF, and the
possible expansion of other types of liquidity provision and other means of using the
Federal Reserve’s balance sheet—are also noted.
(37) Given that most market participants appear to expect only a 50 basis point
reduction in the target at this meeting, a decision to reduce it instead by at least
75 basis points will come as surprise, but likely not a large one since some investors
apparently anticipate that the target will be brought down to ¼ percent at the January
meeting. As a result, nominal interest rates would likely decline a little, stock prices
may increase some, and the foreign exchange value of the dollar may decline
modestly. As in Alternative B, market participants may also be surprised by the
 
reference to unconventional policy measures, and medium- and long-term Treasury
yields might edge lower.
(38) The Committee may prefer Alternative C for a number of reasons.
Members may feel that a substantial policy easing at this meeting is warranted in
response to the sharp deterioration of the economic outlook in recent weeks. A
50 basis point cut in the target rate at this meeting may be seen as appropriate,
considering that policy has been eased substantially over the last year, that a number
of extraordinary liquidity measures have been put in place or are in train, and that
mortgage rates have already dropped appreciably in light of the Federal Reserve’s
recently announced program to purchase agency debt and mortgage-backed securities.
The Committee may wish to give the stimulus produced by the combination of all
these policies a chance to show its effects, while at the same time leaving open the
possibility of a further reduction in the target rate and the implementation of more
unconventional policy actions should macroeconomic conditions fail to improve. A
reduction in the target rate to ½ percent that is matched by a comparable reduction in
the interest rate on excess reserves would likely cause federal funds to trade below the
new target. Even so, the Committee may still want to set a target of ½ percent to
signal where it would want federal funds to trade once financial conditions begin to
improve, some Federal Reserve programs are unwound, and the amount of excess
reserves in the system returns to a more normal level.
(39) Alternatively, members may feel that quite forceful policy action is required
to counter the sharp deterioration in the economic outlook but at the same time be
unwilling to lower the target rate below 50 basis points. Members’ reluctance to move
to an extremely low target federal funds rate may stem from concerns about the
potential for adverse consequences on various financial markets and institutions that
such a move could engender. Such a concern may be reinforced by the likelihood that
federal funds will trade below the new target until improved financial conditions allow
 
a substantial reduction in excess reserves in the financial system. Members may also
be worried that a very low target for the federal funds rate may itself lead to
undesirable increases in inflation expectations. The Committee may thus view
½ percent as a floor for the target federal funds rate and may wish to apply any
further monetary stimulus exclusively through unconventional policies, such as
purchases of agency and mortgage-backed securities or Treasury securities.
(40) As a third motivation for favoring Alternative C, members may view a
decision to reduce the target rate by 50 basis points as an intermediate step towards
reaching a level of rates closer to the zero bound at a later date. Such an approach
would be consistent with the staff’s assumption in the Greenbook projection, the
prescriptions of a number of policy rules, and the optimal control simulations with an
inflation target of either 1½ or 2 percent described in the monetary policy strategies
section of this Bluebook. Even if members are not concerned that a sustained
environment of very low interest rates will be particularly harmful to certain financial
markets and institutions, they may still believe that making the move toward the zero
bound in two steps would be preferable on the grounds that it would allow market
participants more time to adjust to a world of near-zero interest rates. In addition, the
Committee may feel that such a gradual approach would not be overly costly in terms
of its macroeconomic objectives since further monetary stimulus could be provided
through additional unconventional policy measures. Finally, an inclination to ease
policy 50 basis points at this meeting might be reinforced by the fact that most market
participants appear to expect a 50 basis point reduction in the target rate, and
Committee members might be reluctant to inject further uncertainty into financial
markets at a time when markets remain extremely fragile.
(41) The rationale section of the statement accompanying Alternative C begins
by acknowledging that economic activity is contracting in the fourth quarter and by
pointing to deterioration in labor markets, household and business spending, and
 
industrial production. The paragraph on inflation reiterates, as in October, that the
Committee expects inflation to moderate because of the weaker economic outlook
and the decline in the prices of energy and other commodities, but also, as in
Alternatives A and B, that there are risks that inflation will fall to rates below those
that would best foster economic growth and price stability. The next paragraph
makes clear that downside risks to the economy are the Committee’s primary concern
and indicates that the Committee “will use all its available tools to promote the
resumption of economic growth and to preserve price stability.” This wording is
intended to leave the door open to, but not promise, a further reduction in the target
rate if conditions warrant, while at the same time making it clear that unconventional
policy actions are also available. Some of these actions, including the possibility that
existing programs may be expanded or new programs may be implemented if
appropriate, are cited in the next paragraph. If the Committee viewed Alternative C
as a stepping stone to an even lower target federal funds rate, it may wish to add a
sentence to signal more clearly to market participants that a further reduction in the
target rate may be forthcoming. For example, the fourth paragraph of the statement
could conclude by saying that, “The Committee will consider whether further
reductions in the target federal funds rate would be beneficial in light of evolving
circumstances.” On the other hand, if the Committee sees ½ percent as a floor below
which it is not likely to push the target rate, it may also wish to make its thinking more
explicit, for example by adding the clause “Although the Committee believes that
further reductions in the target federal funds rate would not be beneficial on balance”
immediately before the indication that the Committee will use all of its available tools
(which in this case would be referred to as “all other available tools”). The statement
concludes with an acknowledgement that federal funds may trade below the target,
given the large amounts of excess reserves in the system.
 
(42) Since most primary dealers see a 50 basis point policy easing as the most
likely outcome at this meeting, and since a majority see ½ percent as the trough for
the target federal funds rate this cycle, the market reaction to an announcement like
that for Alternative C is likely to be muted, with short-term interest rates, equity
prices, and the foreign exchange value of the dollar all changing little. The
movements in these variables may be a bit more pronounced if the Committee
decided to be more explicit regarding its proclivity to move the target rate lower in the
future because the uncertainty as to the floor for the target would be removed; any
such move, however, is not likely to be major, partly because market participants may
expect federal funds to trade quite soft to the target in any case. As in Alternative B,
longer-term interest rates may decline a little, but probably not by much, because
investors may be somewhat surprised by the language on the use of the Federal
Reserve’s balance sheet as a means of further supporting credit markets and economic
activity.
(43) If the Committee’s view of the economic outlook is appreciably more
optimistic than the staff’s, and, in particular, if members believe that past policy
actions, along with those announced but not yet implemented, will be sufficient to
return the economy to a path of moderate economic growth before too long, the
Committee may wish to leave the target rate unchanged at this meeting as in
Alternative D. Committee members may have a somewhat more upbeat outlook for
2009 and 2010 that the staff and may believe, for example, that the recovery from the
present recession, starting in the second half of next year, will be more robust than
anticipated by the staff, as in the “faster recovery” alternative scenario in the
Greenbook. In addition, the Committee may think that the policy actions taken
recently not only by the Federal Reserve but also by other foreign central banks, the
Congress, the Treasury, and the FDIC (including the reduction in policy rates to very
low levels, purchases of agency debt and mortgage-backed securities, extraordinary
 
liquidity measures, official steps to strengthen the financial system, and fiscal stimulus)
should be given a chance to work, and that their combined effect could potentially be
very large. Indeed members may be mindful that the extent and timing of some of
those policies, such as the fiscal package that will ultimately be passed by the
Congress, is still unknown. The fiscal package may well turn out to be larger, or
implemented sooner, than currently assumed in the staff forecast. (The “bigger fiscal
package” scenario in the Greenbook illustrates this possibility.) With that upside risk
in mind, the Committee may want to pause at least at this meeting and see whether
the economy will show some signs of recovery as these policies begin to take effect.
The Committee may also anticipate that, although federal funds are likely to continue
to trade below target for a time because of the large amounts of excess reserves
currently in the system, an unchanged federal funds rate target provides a better signal
of its policy intentions. The Committee may believe that, over time, existing liquidity
facilities can be scaled back or eliminated, allowing the federal funds rate to converge
back to its target level. Alternatively, members may feel that bringing the target to an
unprecedented low level may increase uncertainty, further compromise market
functioning, decrease confidence, perhaps boost inflation expectations, and so
ultimately be counterproductive. Members may also want to preserve some room to
lower the target rate at a later date in order to bolster confidence should further
negative shocks hit the economy.
(44) The rationale portion of the statement accompanying Alternative D
acknowledges that the pace of economic activity appears to have slowed further and
that the near-term outlook has deteriorated. However, the statement notes that the
Committee expects the recent policy measures to improve credit conditions and
promote a return to moderate growth over time. To underscore that the Federal
Reserve has already taken concrete actions in response to the deterioration in the
outlook, the remaining part of that paragraph notes that the Federal Reserve will
 
purchase large amounts of agency and mortgage-backed securities and will implement
the TALF early next year. The language on inflation remains unchanged from the
October meeting, and the last paragraph acknowledges, as in Alternative C, that
federal funds may continue to trade below the target for some time. The statement
concludes by noting that the Committee will monitor economic and financial
developments and will act as needed to promote its statutory objectives. That
declaration, together with the indication of downside risks to the outlook, would likely
be seen as signaling that the Committee is open to further reduction in the target rate
at upcoming meetings if conditions warrant.
(45) Given current expectations, market participants would likely be extremely
surprised if the Committee were to leave the target rate unchanged. Short-term
interest rates would probably back up somewhat, although the extent of the increase
would likely be moderated by recognition that federal funds would continue to trade
below target for some time. Equity prices would drop, and the dollar would
appreciate. The absence of any reference to additional means of using the Federal
Reserve balance sheet to improve credit and liquidity conditions would likely induce
investors to reconsider their views of the likelihood of further purchases of assets by
the Federal Reserve, and medium- and longer-term yields would probably move
notably higher. Overall, volatility and strains in financial markets would likely
increase.
Money and Debt Forecasts
(46) The staff forecast for M2 has changed little since October. After expanding
at a 7½ percent rate this year, boosted by the decline in short-term rates and the
associated drop in the opportunity cost of holding M2 assets, M2 growth is projected
to slow to about 3 percent in 2009 as nominal GDP growth falls and opportunity cost
 
begins to rise. In 2010, M2 is anticipated to grow at roughly the same rate as in 2009
and about in line with nominal GDP.
(47) Amid sharply curtailed mortgage and consumer credit, household debt is
expected to decline about 1 percent in 2009 and to rise just a little in 2010 as credit
constraints ease only gradually. Even though overall credit conditions are expected to
ease over time, nonfinancial business debt will likely expand at a weak pace next year
and in 2010, as capital spending will remain sluggish. Federal debt, which has surged
in the second half of 2008 because of government programs aimed at addressing
financial market strains, is anticipated to continue to grow at a rapid pace throughout
the forecast period. Overall, total domestic nonfinancial debt is projected to expand
4½ percent in 2009 and 4¼ percent in 2010.
 
Table 2
Bluebook Alternatives Strictly Confidential 
Ease Ease Ease No Greenbook
M2 Path 75 bp 50 bp 25 bp change Forecast*
Monthly Growth Rates
Jan-08 7.2 7.2 7.2 7.2 7.2 7.2
Feb-08 15.8 15.8 15.8 15.8 15.8 15.8
Mar-08 11.3 11.3 11.3 11.3 11.3 11.3
Apr-08 2.1 2.1 2.1 2.1 2.1 2.1
May-08 1.5 1.5 1.5 1.5 1.5 1.5
Jun-08 -0.3 -0.3 -0.3 -0.3 -0.3 -0.3
Jul-08 6.4 6.4 6.4 6.4 6.4 6.4
Aug-08 -1.5 -1.5 -1.5 -1.5 -1.5 -1.5
Sep-08 15.5 15.5 15.5 15.5 15.5 15.5
Oct-08 17.0 17.0 17.0 17.0 17.0 17.0
Nov-08 8.4 8.4 8.4 8.4 8.4 8.4
Dec-08 9.9 10.1 9.9 9.7 9.5 9.9
Jan-09 6.0 6.6 6.0 5.4 4.8 6.0
Feb-09 4.0 4.4 3.6 2.8 2.0 4.0
Mar-09 3.0 3.0 2.2 1.5 0.7 3.0
Apr-09 2.0 1.8 1.2 0.6 0.0 2.0
May-09 2.0 1.7 1.3 0.8 0.4 2.0
Jun-09 2.0 1.9 1.5 1.1 0.7 2.0
Quarterly Growth Rates
2008 Q1 9.0 9.0 9.0 9.0 9.0 9.0
2008 Q2 5.3 5.3 5.3 5.3 5.3 5.3
2008 Q3 3.6 3.6 3.6 3.6 3.6 3.6
2008 Q4 12.0 12.0 12.0 12.0 12.0 12.0
2009 Q1 6.4 6.7 6.2 5.7 5.2 6.4
2009 Q2 2.5 2.3 1.7 1.1 0.5 2.5
Annual Growth Rates
2007 5.7 5.7 5.7 5.7 5.7 5.7
2008 7.7 7.7 7.7 7.7 7.7 7.7
2009 3.0 3.0 2.6 2.2 1.8 3.0
Growth From To
2007 Q4 Nov-08 7.6 7.6 7.6 7.6 7.6 7.6
2007 Q4 Dec-08 7.9 7.9 7.9 7.8 7.8 7.9
2008 Q4 Jun-09 4.1 4.2 3.6 3.1 2.5 4.1
Nov-08 Jun-09 4.2 4.3 3.7 3.1 2.6 4.2
Dec-08 Jun-09 3.2 3.3 2.6 2.0 1.4 3.2
2008 Q4 Jun-09 4.1 4.2 3.6 3.1 2.5 4.1
2007 Q4 2008 Q4 7.7 7.7 7.7 7.7 7.7 7.7
2008 Q4 2009 Q4 3.0 3.0 2.6 2.2 1.8 3.0
* This forecast is consistent with nominal GDP and interest rates in the Greenbook forecast.
 
Alternatives for the