Alternative C
1. The Federal Open Market Committee decided today to keep its target range for the federal funds
rate at 0 to 1/4 percent. The Committee continues to anticipate that economic conditions are likely
to warrant exceptionally low levels of the federal funds rate for some time.
2. Information received since the Committee met in December suggests that the outlook for the
economy remains weak. Industrial production, housing starts, and employment have continued to
decline steeply, as consumers and businesses have cut back spending. Conditions in some financial
markets have improved, in part reflecting government efforts to provide liquidity and strengthen
financial institutions; nevertheless, credit conditions for households and firms remain tight. The
Committee anticipates that a recovery in economic activity will begin later this year, supported in
part by additional fiscal measures and the monetary and liquidity policies already in place.
3. The declines in the prices of energy and other commodities in recent months have significantly
reduced overall price inflation. With economic slack likely to persist, the Committee expects that
both overall and core consumer price inflation will remain low.
4. The Federal Reserve will employ all available tools to promote the resumption of sustainable
economic growth and to preserve price stability. The focus of the Committee’s policy is to support
the functioning of financial markets and stimulate the economy through open market operations and
other measures that are likely to keep the size of the Federal Reserve's balance sheet at a high level.
The Federal Reserve continues to purchase large quantities of agency debt and mortgage-backed
securities to provide support to the mortgage and housing markets. Next month, the Federal
Reserve will implement the Term Asset-Backed Securities Loan Facility to facilitate the extension of
credit to households and small businesses. The Committee will continue to monitor carefully the
size and composition of the Federal Reserve’s balance sheet in light of evolving financial market
developments.
 
(40) If the Committee agrees that current economic conditions are very weak but
suspects that there is a significant possibility that policy actions already announced or
likely to be adopted will have a larger effect on economic activity than is assumed in
the staff’s forecast, it may wish to choose Alternative B. In many ways, the current
circumstances are unprecedented, and we lack reliable metrics for gauging the
effectiveness of nontraditional policies. In light of the aggressive monetary actions
already taken or announced and the large fiscal package likely to be passed, members
may believe that it is prudent at this stage to wait and assess further developments
before committing the Federal Reserve to any additional actions. In particular,
members may wish to observe the market reaction to the implementation of the
TALF, planned for next month. Moreover, the incoming administration may move
rapidly to ramp up efforts to deal with the financial crisis, and the Committee will be
better placed to assess these efforts in a few weeks. Alternatively, members may be
concerned about the challenges of exiting from measures already adopted, and thus
may wish to be quite cautious in implementing further liquidity programs. At the
same time, given that the forecasts of the staff and most private analysts imply that
additional macroeconomic stimulus would be desirable, the Committee may not want
to signal a halt to further monetary actions. Alternative B states that additional
actions will be taken as needed, and so would allow the Committee to introduce new
policies quickly if it concluded that they were appropriate.
(41) If the Committee shares the staff’s assessment that policies already
announced or expected will not suffice to prevent considerable economic slack and a
heightened risk of deflation, and if it believes that additional policy measures could
help to improve the economic outlook, it may opt for Alternative A. The output gap
in the Greenbook remains larger than 5 percent over the next two years and core
inflation falls below 1 percent, which is lower than the rates of inflation that most
 
FOMC participants would view as consistent with the Federal Reserve’s dual
mandate. Most private-sector analysts have marked up their forecasts for the
unemployment rate in 2009 and 2010 to levels about the same as projected by the
staff, and they forecast relatively low rates of inflation, albeit not as low as the staff.
Even if members have a less gloomy outlook for the economy, they may view the
downside risks to this outlook as unusually large and thus may wish to take out
“insurance” against an unwelcome further weakening in growth or drop in inflation.
The significant decline in long-term interest rates, including conventional mortgage
rates, since the Federal Reserve announced plans to purchase agency debt and MBS
may give policymakers confidence that nontraditional policies can provide significant
economic stimulus. As a result, the Committee may conclude that an expansion of
these purchases would likely lead to further reductions in rates and increases in
mortgage availability. Or, if the level of long-term interest rates is seen as higher than
is consistent with a rapid economic recovery, the Committee may wish to engage in
large-scale purchases of long-term Treasury securities. By lowering the general level
of long-term interest rates, either of these options could support business and
household spending.
(42) If the Committee has a relatively optimistic view of the underlying
economic situation and outlook, it may be inclined to favor Alternative C. Members
may anticipate a more rapid unwinding of financial strains than assumed by the staff,
leading to a more pronounced rebound in activity (as in the “Faster Recovery”
alternative scenario in the Greenbook). Such an outcome might be the result of a new
and aggressive approach by the incoming administration to the ongoing financial
crisis. Alternatively, members may believe that the monetary policies and liquidity
facilities that already have been implemented or announced will provide greater
stimulus to economic activity than is built into the staff forecast. Similarly, the
Committee may have a larger estimate of the fiscal multiplier than that assumed by the
 
staff in its analysis of the likely effects of the fiscal stimulus package. Finally, as in
Alternative B, the Committee may be concerned that exiting from the existing
facilities could prove challenging and prefer not to take the risk of adding to such
difficulties. Indeed, if the public came to view the expansion of the Federal Reserve
balance sheet as implying a permanent increase in the monetary base, inflation
expectations could increase, and inflation risk premiums in financial assets might rise
in a destabilizing manner. The language in Alternative C makes clear that existing
Federal Reserve policies and programs are viewed by the Committee as helpful, but it
does not hint at any expansion of existing programs or the introduction of new
programs.
(43) Based on interest rate futures contracts and on the Desk’s survey of dealers,
market participants attach virtually no probability to a change in the target range for
the federal funds rate at this meeting. Dealers generally expect the statement to
continue to refer to the funds rate remaining low for some time and to focus on the
Federal Reserve’s nontraditional policy tools. On average, dealers place the odds of
large-scale Federal Reserve purchases of long-term Treasury securities at about 50
percent, with no time horizon specified for the onset of such purchases. Although
market expectations for the statement overall are difficult to judge, the message of
Alternative B seems most consistent with current market views.
Money and Debt Forecasts
(44) Bank credit is forecasted to grow at a sluggish 2¼ percent pace in 2009.
Relatively tight credit standards and terms and weak loan demand are expected to
persist, and each category of core loans on banks' books—commercial and industrial,
real estate, and consumer—are projected to be nearly flat. In contrast, securities
holdings are expected to expand moderately this year, as banks continue to park
deposits and other sources of funds in safe and liquid investments. In 2010, when
 
GDP growth is projected to pick up and the effect of tighter lending standards and
terms wanes, bank credit grows around 5 percent, mainly owing to increases in real
estate and consumer loans as well as continued expansion of securities.
(45) Amid sharply curtailed credit availability, household debt is expected to
decline about 1 percent in 2009 and to rise at a modest pace in 2010 as credit
constraints ease only gradually. Even though overall credit conditions are expected to
improve over time, nonfinancial business debt will likely expand at a weak pace next
year and in 2010, as capital spending remains sluggish. Federal debt, which surged in
the second half of 2008 because of government programs aimed at ameliorating
financial market strains, is anticipated to continue to grow at a rapid pace throughout
the forecast period, reflecting the fiscal package and continued outlays to support
financial institutions and markets. Overall, total domestic nonfinancial debt is
projected to expand 5 percent in 2009 and 4¾ percent in 2010.
(46) M2 is projected to grow at a 3 percent annual rate this year, somewhat faster
than the projected growth rate of nominal GDP, reflecting the lagged effects of recent
declines in the opportunity cost of holding M2 assets. In 2010, money growth is
expected to align roughly with growth in nominal GDP as these lagged effects
subside.