AUGUST FOMC STATEMENT—ALTERNATIVE A
1. Information received since the Federal Open Market Committee met in April over
recent months has increasingly suggested suggests that the economic recovery in
economic activity and the labor market is proceeding at an unsatisfactory pace and
that the labor market is improving gradually. Household spending is increasing only
gradually but and remains constrained by high unemployment, modest income
growth, lower housing wealth, and tight credit. Business spending on equipment and
software has risen significantly is rising less rapidly than earlier in the year, and
the contribution of inventory investment to growth is likely to wane. ; however,
Investment in nonresidential structures continues to be weak, and employers remain
reluctant to add to payrolls. Housing starts remain at a depressed level. Financial
conditions have become somewhat less supportive of economic growth in recent
months, on balance, largely reflecting developments abroad. and bank lending has
continued to contract in recent months. Nonetheless,Although the Committee still
anticipates a gradual return to higher levels of resource utilization in a context of s
e
price stability, although the pace of economic recovery is likely to be moderate for a v
i
t
time the near-term outlook for economic activity has weakened. a
n
r
e
2. Prices of energy and other commodities have declined somewhat in recent months, t
l
A
and Measures of underlying inflation has have trended lower in recent quarters.
With substantial resource slack continuing to restrain cost pressures and longer-term
inflation expectations stable, inflation is likely to be subdued remain, for some time,
below levels that the Committee considers most consistent with its mandate to
promote maximum employment and stable prices.
3. To support the economic recovery, the Committee will maintain decided to reduce
the target range for the federal funds rate at to 0 to ¼ ⅛ percent and continues to
anticipate that economic conditions, including low rates of resource utilization,
subdued inflation trends, and stable inflation expectations, are likely to warrant
exceptionally low levels of the federal funds rate for an extended period. Consistent
with this reduction, the Board of Governors cut the remuneration rates on
required and excess reserve balances to 10 basis points effective with the reserve
maintenance period beginning August 12. The Committee anticipates
maintaining this range for the federal funds rate until resource utilization and
underlying inflation have moved appreciably closer to levels consistent with its
longer-term objectives.
4. To provide additional support for the economic recovery, the Committee will
maintain the Federal Reserve’s holdings of longer-term securities at their
current level by reinvesting principal payments from agency debt and agency
mortgage-backed securities in Treasury securities. The Committee will continue
to roll over the Federal Reserve’s holdings of Treasury securities as they mature.
5. The Committee will continue to monitor the economic outlook and financial
developments and will employ its policy tools as necessary to promote economic
recovery and price stability.