NOVEMBER FOMC STATEMENT—ALTERNATIVE A
1. Information received since the Federal Open Market Committee met in August September
indicates confirms that the pace of recovery in output and employment has slowed in recent
months continues to be slow. Household spending is increasing gradually, but remains
constrained by high unemployment, modest income growth, lower housing wealth, and tight
credit. Business spending on equipment and software is rising, though less rapidly than
earlier in the year, while investment in nonresidential structures continues to be weak.
Employers remain reluctant to add to payrolls. Housing starts continue to be are at a
depressed level. Bank lending has continued to contract, but at a reduced rate in recent
months. The Committee anticipates a gradual return to higher levels of resource utilization in
a context of price stability, although the pace of economic recovery is likely to be modest in
the near term. Longer-term inflation expectations have remained stable, but measures of
underlying inflation have trended lower in recent quarters.
2. Consistent with its statutory mandate, the Committee seeks to foster maximum
s employment and price stability. Currently, the unemployment rate is elevated, and
e
v measures of underlying inflation are currently at levels somewhat low below those, relative
i
a t to levels that the Committee judges to be most consistent, over the longer run, with its dual
n
r mandate. to promote maximum employment and price stability. With substantial resource
e
t slack continuing to restrain cost pressures and longer-term inflation expectations stable,
l
A
inflation is likely to remain subdued for some time before rising to levels the Committee
considers consistent with its mandate. Although the Committee anticipates a gradual
return to higher levels of resource utilization in a context of price stability, it judges that
progress toward its objectives has been unacceptably slow.
3. To promote a stronger pace of economic recovery and to return inflation, over time, to
levels consistent with its mandate, the Committee decided today to expand its holdings
of securities. The Committee also will maintain its existing policy of reinvesting principal
payments from its securities holdings and intends to purchase an additional $1 trillion of
longer-term Treasury securities by the end of 2011, an average pace of approximately
$70 billion of purchases per month.
4. The Committee expects to will maintain the target range for the federal funds rate at 0 to ¼
percent at least until mid-2012, so long as: The unemployment rate remains elevated;
the Committee continues to anticipate that such a policy stance will not lead to rates of
inflation in the intermediate term that exceed the levels that it deems consistent with its
mandate; and longer-term inflation expectations remain well anchored. and continues to
anticipate that economic conditions, including low rates of resource utilization, subdued
inflation trends, and stable inflation expectations, are likely to warrant exceptionally low
levels for the federal funds rate for an extended period.
5. The Committee will continue to monitor the economic outlook and financial developments
and is prepared to provide additional accommodation if as needed to support strengthen the
economic recovery and to return move inflation, over time, to levels consistent with its
mandate.