AUGUST FOMC STATEMENT—ALTERNATIVE B1
1. Information received since the Federal Open Market Committee met in April June
suggests indicates that the economic pace of recovery in output and employment
has slowed is proceeding and that the labor market is improving gradually.
Household spending is increasing gradually, but remains constrained by high
unemployment, modest income growth, lower housing wealth, and tight credit.
Business spending on equipment and software has risen significantly is rising;
however, investment in nonresidential structures continues to be weak and employers
remain reluctant to add to payrolls. Housing starts remain at a depressed level.
Financial conditions have become less supportive of economic growth on balance,
largely reflecting developments abroad. Bank lending has continued to contract in
recent months. Nonetheless, the Committee anticipates a gradual return to higher
levels of resource utilization in a context of price stability, although the pace of
economic recovery is likely to be moderate for a time modest in the near term.
s
e
v 2. Prices of energy and other commodities have declined somewhat in recent months,
i
t
a
n and Measures of underlying inflation has have trended lower in recent quarters.
r
e and, with substantial resource slack continuing to restrain cost pressures and longer-
t
l
A term inflation expectations stable, inflation is likely to be subdued for some time.
3. The Committee will maintain the target range for the federal funds rate at 0 to ¼
percent and continues to anticipates that, with inflation expectations stable,
economic conditions, including low rates of resource utilization, subdued inflation
trends, and stable inflation expectations, are likely to warrant exceptionally low levels
of the federal funds rate are likely to be warranted for an extended period—at least
until resource utilization and underlying inflation are clearly moving toward
levels consistent with the Committee’s longer-term objectives.
4. To help support a more timely return to those objectives, the Committee will
maintain the Federal Reserve’s holdings of longer-term securities at their
current level by reinvesting principal payments from agency debt and agency
mortgage-backed securities in Treasury securities. The Committee will continue
to roll over the Federal Reserve’s holdings of Treasury securities as they mature.
5. The Committee will continue to monitor the economic outlook and financial
developments and will employ its policy tools as necessary to promote economic
recovery and price stability.