SEPTEMBER FOMC STATEMENT—ALTERNATIVE C
1. Information received since the Federal Open Market Committee met in JuneAugust
indicates that the pace of economic recovery in output and employment has slowed in
recent monthsis proceeding. Household income and spending isare increasing
gradually. , but remains constrained by high unemployment, modest income growth,
lower housing wealth, and tight credit. Manufacturing activity and business
spending on equipment and software have risen.is rising; however, investment in
nonresidential structures continues to be weak and employers remain reluctant to add
to payrolls. Housing starts remain at a depressed level. Bank lending has continued to
contract, but at a reduced rate in recent months. Measures of underlying inflation
have trended lowerstayed subdued in recent quarters, and longer-term inflation
expectations have remained stable. Nonetheless, the Committee anticipates a gradual
return to higher levels of resource utilization in a context of price stability, Although
the pace of economic recovery is likely to be more modest in the near term, than had
s been anticipated.the Committee continues to anticipate a gradual return to higher
e
v levels of resource utilization in a context of price stability.
i
t
a
n
2. Measures of underlying inflation have trended lower in recent quarters and, with
r
e
t substantial resource slack continuing to restrain cost pressures and longer-term
l
A
inflation expectations stable, inflation is likely to be subdued for some time.
2. The Committee will maintain the target range for the federal funds rate at 0 to ¼
percent and continues to anticipates that economic conditions, including low rates of
resource utilization, subdued inflation trends, and stable inflation expectations, are
likely to warrant exceptionally low levels of the federal funds rate for an extended
periodsome time. To help support the economic recovery in a context of price
stability, For the time being, the Committee also will maintain its existing policy of
reinvesting principal payments to keep constant the Federal Reserve’s holdings of
securities at their current level. by reinvesting principal payments from agency debt
and agency mortgage-backed securities in longer-term Treasury securities. The
Committee will continue to roll over the Federal Reserve's holdings of Treasury
securities as they mature.
3. The Committee will continue to monitor the economic outlook and financial
developments and will employ its policy tools as necessary to promote economic
recovery and price stability.