AUGUST FOMC STATEMENT—ALTERNATIVE C
1. Information received since the Federal Open Market Committee met in April June
suggests that the economic recovery is proceeding and that the labor market is
improving gradually. Household spending is increasing and but remains constrained
by high unemployment, modest income growth, lower housing wealth, and tight
credit. business spending on equipment and software has risen significantly continues
to advance however, investment in nonresidential structures continues to be weak
and employers remain reluctant to add to payrolls. Financial conditions have become
less somewhat more supportive of economic growth on balance in recent weeks,
largely reflecting developments abroad. Bank lending has continued to contract in
recent months. Though underlying inflation has trended lower, longer-term inflation
expectations have remained stable. The Committee believes that a sustainable
economic recovery is under way and Nonetheless, anticipates a gradual return to
higher levels of resource utilization in a context of price stability, although the pace
s of economic recovery is likely to be moderate for a time.
e
v
t i 2. Prices of energy and other commodities have declined somewhat in recent months,
a
n
and underlying inflation has trended lower. With substantial resource slack
r
e
t continuing to restrain cost pressures and longer-term inflation expectations stable,
l
A
inflation is likely to be subdued for some time.
2. The Committee will decided to maintain the target range for the federal funds rate at
0 to ¼ percent and continues to anticipates that economic conditions, including low
rates of resource utilization, subdued inflation trends, and stable inflation
expectations, are likely to warrant exceptionally low levels of the federal funds rate
for an extended period some time. The Committee will continue its approach of
not reinvesting payments of principal on mortgage-backed securities and
maturing agency debt held by the System Open Market Account. As a further
step toward reducing the size of the Federal Reserve’s balance sheet and the
level of reserves in the banking system, on [September 1] the Committee will
stop reinvesting the proceeds of maturing Treasury securities. The Committee
will continue to monitor the economic outlook and financial developments and will
employ its policy tools as necessary to promote economic recovery and price
stability.