SEPTEMBER FOMC STATEMENT—ALTERNATIVE B
1. Information received since the Federal Open Market Committee met in JuneAugust
indicatesconfirms that the pace of recovery in output and employment has slowed in
recent months. Household spending is increasing gradually, but remains constrained
by high unemployment, modest income growth, lower housing wealth, and tight
credit. Business spending on equipment and software is rising, though less rapidly
than earlier in the year; however, while investment in nonresidential structures
continues to be weak. and Employers remain reluctant to add to payrolls. Housing
starts remainare at a depressed level. Bank lending has continued to contract, but at a
reduced rate in recent months. Nonetheless, The Committee anticipates a gradual
return to higher levels of resource utilization in a context of price stability, although
the pace of economic recovery is likely to be more modest in the near term than had
been anticipated.
2. Measures of underlying inflation have trended lower in recent quarters, to levels
s
somewhat below those the Committee judges most consistent, over the longer e
v
run, with its mandate to promote maximum employment and price stability. and t i
a
With substantial resource slack continuing to restrain cost pressures and longer-term n
r
e
inflation expectations stable, inflation is likely to beremain subdued for some time t
l
A
before rising to levels the Committee considers consistent with its mandate.
3. The Committee will maintain the target range for the federal funds rate at 0 to ¼
percent and continues to anticipate that economic conditions, including low rates of
resource utilization, subdued inflation trends, and stable inflation expectations, are
likely to warrant exceptionally low levels for the federal funds rate for an extended
period. The Committee also will maintain its existing policy of reinvesting
principal payments from its securities holdings.
4. To help support the economic recovery in a context of price stability, the Committee
will keep constant the Federal Reserve's holdings of securities at their current level by
reinvesting principal payments from agency debt and agency mortgage-backed
securities in longer-term Treasury securities. The Committee will continue to roll
over the Federal Reserve's holdings of Treasury securities as they mature.
4. The Committee will continue to monitor the economic outlook and financial
developments and will employ its policy tools as necessary to promote economic
recovery and price stability. is prepared to provide additional accommodation as
needed to foster a stronger economic recovery and to help return inflation, over
time, to levels consistent with its mandate.