DECEMBER FOMC STATEMENT—ALTERNATIVE D
1. Information received since the Federal Open Market Committee met in September
November confirms indicates that the pace of economic recovery in output and
employment continues to be slow is proceeding. Household Spending by
households and businesses is increasing gradually, at a moderate pace. but
remains constrained by high unemployment, modest income growth, lower housing
wealth, and tight credit. Business spending on equipment and software is rising,
though less rapidly than earlier in the year, while investment in nonresidential
structures continues to be weak. Employers remain reluctant to add to payrolls.
Housing starts continues to be depressed. Longer-term inflation expectations have
remained stable, but Although measures of underlying inflation have trended lower
in recent quarters, longer-term inflation expectations have remained stable. The
Committee anticipates a gradual return to higher levels of resource utilization in
a context of price stability.
s
e
v 2. Consistent with its statutory mandate, the Committee seeks to foster maximum
i
t
a
n employment and price stability. Currently, the unemployment rate is elevated, and
r
e measures of underlying inflation are somewhat low, relative to levels that the
t
l
A Committee judges to be consistent, over the longer run, with its dual mandate.
Although the Committee anticipates a gradual return to higher levels of resource
utilization in a context of price stability, progress toward its objectives has been
disappointingly slow.
2. To promote a stronger pace of economic recovery and to help ensure that inflation,
over time, is at levels consistent with its mandate, Based on this assessment of
current and prospective economic conditions, the Committee decided today to
discontinue the asset-purchase program it announced in November expand its
holdings of securities. For the time being, the Committee will maintain its existing
policy of reinvesting principal payments from its securities holdings. In addition, the
Committee intends to purchase a further $600 billion of longer-term Treasury
securities by the end of the second quarter of 2011, a pace of about $75 billion per
month. The Committee will regularly review the pace of its securities purchases and
the overall size of the asset-purchase program in light of incoming information and
will adjust the program as needed to best foster maximum employment and price
stability.
3. The Committee will maintain the target range for the federal funds rate at 0 to ¼
percent and continues to anticipates that economic conditions, including low rates of
resource utilization, subdued inflation trends, and stable inflation expectations, are
likely to warrant exceptionally low levels for the federal funds rate for an extended
period some time.
4. The Committee will continue to monitor the economic outlook and financial
developments and will employ its policy tools as necessary to support the economic
recovery and to help ensure that inflation, over time, is at levels consistent with its
mandate promote maximum employment and price stability.