NOVEMBER FOMC STATEMENT—ALTERNATIVE D
1. Information received since the Federal Open Market Committee met in August September
indicates that the pace of economic recovery in output and employment has slowed in recent
months is proceeding. Household income and spending are is increasing gradually, but
remains constrained by high unemployment, modest income growth, lower housing wealth,
and tight credit., and business spending on equipment and software is rising., though less
rapidly than earlier in the year, while investment in nonresidential structures continues to be
weak. Employers remain reluctant to add to payrolls. Housing starts are at a depressed level.
The contraction in bank lending has slowed continued to contract, but at a reduced rate in
recent months. The Committee anticipates a gradual return to higher levels of resource
utilization in a context of price stability, although the pace of economic recovery is likely to
be modest in the near term.
Measures of underlying inflation are currently at levels somewhat below those the Committee
judges most consistent, over the longer run, with its mandate to promote maximum
employment and price stability. With substantial resource slack continuing to restrain cost
s
e
pressures and longer-term inflation expectations stable, inflation is likely to remain subdued v
i
for some time before rising to levels the Committee considers consistent with its mandate. a t
n
r
e
2. The Committee will decided to maintain the target range for the federal funds rate at 0 to ¼ t
l
A
percent and continues to anticipates that economic conditions, including low rates of resource
utilization, subdued inflation trends, and stable inflation expectations, are likely to warrant
exceptionally low levels for the federal funds rate for an extended period some time. For the
time being, the Committee also will maintain its existing policy of reinvesting principal
payments from its securities holdings.
3. The Committee will continue to monitor the economic outlook and financial developments
and is prepared to provide additional accommodation if needed to support the economic
recovery and to return inflation, over time, to levels consistent with its mandate anticipates
that it will gradually begin to remove policy accommodation at the appropriate time to
promote maximum employment and price stability.