DECEMBER FOMC STATEMENT—ALTERNATIVE C
1. Information received since the Federal Open Market Committee met in September
November confirms indicates that the pace of recovery in output and employment
continues to be slow is continuing. Household Spending is by households and
businesses appears to be increasing gradually, at a moderate pace. but remains
constrained by high unemployment, modest income growth, lower housing wealth,
and tight credit. Business spending on equipment and software is rising has
decelerated, though less rapidly than earlier in the year, while investment in
nonresidential structures continues to be weak. However, employers remain reluctant
to add to payrolls. and housing starts continue to be depressed. Longer-term inflation
expectations have remained stable, but measures of underlying inflation have trended
lower in recent quarters.
2. Consistent with its statutory mandate, the Committee seeks to foster maximum
s
employment and price stability. Currently, the unemployment rate is elevated, and e
v
measures of underlying inflation are somewhat low, relative to levels that the t i
a
Committee judges to be consistent, over the longer run, with its dual mandate. n
r
e
Although the Committee anticipates a gradual return to higher levels of resource t
l
A
utilization in a context of price stability, progress toward its objectives has been
disappointingly slow.
3. To promote a stronger pace of economic recovery and to help ensure that inflation,
over time, is at levels consistent with its mandate, the Committee decided today to
continue expanding its holdings of securities. However, in light of incoming
information, the Committee now intends to increase its holdings of securities by
a total of $400 billion—$200 billion less than announced last month—by
purchasing longer-term Treasury securities at a pace of about $50 billion per
month through the second quarter of 2011. In addition, the Committee will
maintain its existing policy of reinvesting principal payments from its securities
holdings. In addition, the Committee intends to purchase a further $600 billion of
longer-term Treasury securities by the end of the second quarter of 2011, a pace of
about $75 billion per month. The Committee will regularly review the pace of its
securities purchases and the overall size of the asset-purchase program in light of
incoming information and will adjust the program as needed to best foster maximum
employment and price stability.
4. The Committee will maintain the target range for the federal funds rate at 0 to ¼
percent and continues to anticipate that economic conditions, including low rates of
resource utilization, subdued inflation trends, and stable inflation expectations, are
likely to warrant exceptionally low levels for the federal funds rate for an extended
period.
5. The Committee will continue to monitor the economic outlook and financial
developments and will employ its policy tools as necessary to support the economic
recovery and to help ensure that inflation, over time, is at levels consistent with its
mandate.