MARCH FOMC STATEMENT—ALTERNATIVE A
1. Information received since the Federal Open Market Committee met in December January
confirms that the economic recovery is continuing. , though at a rate that has been
insufficient to bring about a significant improvement in Although overall conditions in
the labor market conditions appear to be improving gradually, employment remains at
low levels. Growth in Household spending has been increasing at a solid rate, on net, in
recent months picked up late last year, but remains constrained by high unemployment,
modest income growth, lower housing wealth, and tight credit. Recent increases in
energy costs may be weighing on household spending on non-energy goods and
services. Business spending on equipment and software is rising, while but investment in
nonresidential structures is still weak. Employers remain reluctant to add to payrolls. The
housing sector continues to be depressed. Although energy and other commodity prices
have risen significantly since the summer, boosting headline inflation, longer-term
inflation expectations have remained stable, and measures of underlying inflation have
been trended ing downward.
s
e
2. Consistent with its statutory mandate, the Committee seeks to foster maximum employment v
i
and price stability. Currently, the unemployment rate is elevated, and measures of a t
n
underlying inflation are somewhat low, relative to levels that the Committee judges to be r
e
consistent, over the longer run, with its dual mandate. Although the Committee anticipates t
l
A
a gradual return to higher levels of resource utilization in a context of price stability,
progress toward its objectives has been disappointingly slow downside risks to the
economic outlook remain significant.
3. To promote a stronger pace of economic recovery and to help ensure that inflation, over
time, is at levels consistent with its mandate, the Committee decided today to continue
expanding its holdings of securities as announced in November. In particular, the
Committee is maintaining its existing policy of reinvesting principal payments from its
securities holdings and will intends to purchase $600 billion of longer-term Treasury
securities by the end of the second quarter of 2011. The Committee will regularly review
the pace of its securities purchases and the overall size of the asset-purchase program in
light of incoming information and will adjust is prepared to expand and extend the
purchase program the program as if needed to best foster maximum employment and
price stability.
4. The Committee will maintain the target range for the federal funds rate at 0 to ¼ percent
and continues to currently anticipates that economic conditions, including low rates of
resource utilization, subdued inflation trends, and stable inflation expectations, are likely to
warrant exceptionally low levels for the federal funds rate at least through mid-2012 for
an extended period.
5. The Committee will continue to monitor the economic outlook and financial developments
and will employ its policy tools as necessary to support the economic recovery and to help
ensure that inflation, over time, is at levels consistent with its mandate.