NOVEMBER FOMC STATEMENT—ALTERNATIVE A1
1. Information received since the Federal Open Market Committee met in August September
indicates that economic growth remains slow strengthened somewhat in the third quarter,
but the pickup was due predominantly to a reversal of the temporary factors that had
weighed on growth earlier in the year. Recent indicators point to continuing weakness in
overall labor market conditions, and the unemployment rate remains elevated. Household
spending has been increaseding at only a modest a somewhat faster pace in recent months
despite some recovery in sales of motor vehicles as supply-chain disruptions have eased.
However, Business investment in equipment and software has continueds to expand, but
investment in nonresidential structures is still weak and the housing sector remains
depressed. Inflation appears to have has moderated since earlier in the year as prices of
energy and some commodities have declined from their peaks. Longer-term inflation
expectations have remained stable.
2. Consistent with its statutory mandate, the Committee seeks to foster maximum employment s
e
v
and price stability. The Committee continues to expect some pickup in the a moderate pace i
t
a
of recovery economic growth over coming quarters but and consequently anticipates that n
r
the unemployment rate will decline only gradually toward levels that the Committee judges e
t
l
to be consistent with its dual mandate. Moreover However, there are significant downside A
risks to the economic outlook, including strains in global financial markets. The Committee
also anticipates that inflation will settle, over coming quarters, at levels at or below those
consistent with the Committee's dual mandate as the effects of past energy and other
commodity price increases dissipate further. However, The Committee will continue to pay
close attention to the evolution of inflation and inflation expectations.
3. To support a stronger economic recovery and to help ensure that inflation, over time, is at
levels consistent with the dual mandate, the Committee decided today to continue its
program to extend the average maturity of its holdings of securities as announced in
September. The Committee intends to purchase, by the end of June 2012, $400 billion of
Treasury securities with remaining maturities of 6 years to 30 years and to sell an equal
amount of Treasury securities with remaining maturities of 3 years or less. This program
should put downward pressure on longer-term interest rates and help make broader financial
conditions more accommodative. To help support conditions in mortgage markets, The
Committee will now is maintaining its existing policies of reinvesting principal payments
from its holdings of agency debt and agency mortgage-backed securities in agency mortgage-
backed securities. In addition the Committee will maintain its existing policy and of rolling
over maturing Treasury securities at auction. The Committee will regularly review the size
and composition of its securities holdings and is prepared to adjust those holdings as
appropriate.
4. The Committee also decided to keep the target range for the federal funds rate at 0 to ¼
percent. and currently The Committee now anticipates that economic conditions—including
low rates of resource utilization and a subdued outlook for inflation over the medium run—
are likely to warrant exceptionally low levels for the federal funds rate at least through mid-
2013 mid-2014.
OR
 
 
 
4´. The Committee also decided to keep the target range for the federal funds rate at 0 to ¼
percent. and currently The Committee now anticipates that economic conditions—including
low rates of resource utilization and a subdued outlook for inflation over the medium run—
are likely to warrant this exceptionally low levels range for the federal funds rate at least
through mid-2013 through the end of 2014. On the basis of currently available
information, the Committee projects the unemployment rate to be about [ 6½ to 7 ]
percent and the inflation rate (as measured by the price index for Personal
Consumption Expenditures) to be around [ 1¾ to 2¼ ] percent at that time.
OR
4´´. The Committee also decided to keep the target range for the federal funds rate at 0 to ¼
percent. and currently The Committee anticipates that economic conditions—including low
rates of resource utilization and a subdued outlook for inflation over the medium run—are
likely to warrant this exceptionally low levels range for the federal funds rate will be
s appropriate at least as long as the unemployment rate exceeds [ 7 ] percent, inflation (as
e
v measured by the price index for Personal Consumption Expenditures) is projected to be
i
t
a at or below [ 2½ ] percent in the medium term, and longer-term inflation expectations
n
e r continue to be well anchored. On the basis of currently available information, the
t
A l Committee expects these conditions to prevail through the end of 2014.
5. The Committee discussed the range of policy tools available will continue to assess the
economic outlook in light of incoming information and is prepared to employ its tools as
appropriate to promote a stronger economic recovery in a context of price stability.