APRIL FOMC STATEMENT—ALTERNATIVE A
1. Information received since the Federal Open Market Committee met in January March
suggests that the economic recovery is on a firmer footing proceeding at a moderate pace,
albeit somewhat more slowly than had been anticipated, and that overall conditions in
the labor market appear to be are improving only gradually. Household spending and
business investment in equipment and software continue to expand, but increased energy
costs may be weighing on consumer purchases of non-energy goods and services.
However Investment in nonresidential structures is still weak, and the housing sector
continues to be depressed. Commodity prices have risen significantly since the last
summer, and concerns about global supplies of crude oil have contributed to a sharp run-up
further increase in oil prices in recent weeks since the Committee met in March.
Nonetheless, While inflation has picked up in recent months, longer-term inflation
expectations have remained stable and measures of underlying inflation have been are still
subdued.
2. Consistent with its statutory mandate, the Committee seeks to foster maximum employment
s
e
and price stability. Currently, The unemployment rate remains elevated, and measures of v
i
underlying inflation continue to be somewhat low, relative to levels that the Committee a t
n
judges to be consistent, over the longer run, with its dual mandate. The recent Increases in r
e
the prices of energy and other commodities are currently putting upward pressure on t
l
A
inflation. The Committee expects these effects to be transitory, but it will pay close
attention to the evolution of inflation and inflation expectations. Although the Committee
continues to anticipate a gradual return to higher levels of resource utilization in a context
of price stability, recent developments have increased the downside risks to the outlook
for economic growth.
3. To promote a stronger pace of economic recovery and to help ensure that inflation, over
time, is at levels consistent with its mandate, the Committee decided today to continue
expanding its holdings of securities as announced in November. In particular, the
Committee is maintaining its existing policy of reinvesting principal payments from its
securities holdings and intends will complete to purchases of $600 billion of longer-term
Treasury securities by the end of the second current quarter of 2011. The Committee will
regularly review the pace of its securities purchases and the overall size of the asset-
purchase program in light of incoming information and will adjust is prepared to expand
and extend the purchase program the program as if needed to best foster maximum
employment and price stability.
4. The Committee will maintain the target range for the federal funds rate at 0 to ¼ percent
and continues to currently anticipates that economic conditions, including low rates of
resource utilization, subdued inflation trends, and stable inflation expectations, are likely to
warrant exceptionally low levels for the federal funds rate for an extended period at least
through mid-2012.
5. The Committee will continue to monitor the economic outlook and financial developments
and will employ its policy tools as necessary to support the economic recovery and to help
ensure that inflation, over time, is at levels consistent with its mandate.