AUGUST FOMC STATEMENT—ALTERNATIVE B
1. Information received since the Federal Open Market Committee met in April June
indicates that the economic growth so far this year recovery is continuing at a
moderate pace, though somewhat more slowly has been slower than the Committee
had expected. Also, Recent labor market indicators continue to show weakness in
overall labor market conditions, have been weaker than anticipated and the
unemployment rate remains elevated. The slower pace of the recovery reflects in
part factors that are likely to be temporary, including the damping effect of higher
food and energy prices on consumer purchasing power and spending as well as
supply chain disruptions associated with the tragic events in Japan. Household
spending has flattened out, investment in nonresidential structures is still weak,
and the housing sector remains depressed. However, business investment in
equipment and software continues to expand. However, investment in nonresidential
structures is still weak, and the housing sector continues to be depressed. The slow
pace of the recovery this year appears to reflect, in part, temporary factors, s
e
including the damping effect of higher food and energy prices on consumer v
i
t
purchasing power and spending as well as supply chain disruptions associated a
n
r
with the tragic events in Japan. Inflation has picked up earlier in the year recent e
t
months, mainly reflecting higher prices for some commodities and imported goods as A l
well as the recent supply chain disruptions. More recently, inflation has moderated
somewhat, as prices of energy and some commodities have leveled off. However,
Longer-term inflation expectations have remained stable.
2. Consistent with its statutory mandate, the Committee seeks to foster maximum
employment and price stability. The unemployment rate remains elevated, however;
The Committee now expects the a somewhat slower pace of recovery to pick up over
coming quarters and anticipates that the unemployment rate to resume its gradual
will decline only gradually toward levels that the Committee judges to be consistent
with its dual mandate. Inflation has moved up recently, but The Committee also
anticipates that inflation will settle, over coming quarters, at subside to levels at or
below those consistent with the Committee's dual mandate as the effects of past
energy and other commodity price increases dissipate further. However
Nonetheless, the Committee will continue to pay close attention to the evolution of
inflation and inflation expectations.
3. To promote the ongoing economic recovery and to help ensure that inflation, over
time, is at levels consistent with its mandate, the Committee decided today to keep the
target range for the federal funds rate at 0 to ¼ percent. The Committee continues to
anticipate that economic conditions—including low rates of resource utilization and a
subdued outlook for inflation over the medium run—are likely to warrant
exceptionally low levels for the federal funds rate for an extended period. The
Committee also will complete its purchases of $600 billion of longer-term Treasury
securities by the end of this month and will maintain its existing policy of reinvesting
principal payments from its securities holdings. The Committee will regularly review
the size and composition of its securities holdings and is prepared to adjust those
holdings as appropriate.
 
 
 
4. The Committee will monitor carefully assess the economic outlook in light of
incoming information and financial developments and will [act as needed | employ
its policy tools as appropriate] to best foster maximum employment and price
stability.
s
e
v
i
t
a
n
r
e
t
l
A