APRIL FOMC STATEMENT—ALTERNATIVE C
1. Information received since the Federal Open Market Committee met in January March
suggests indicates that the economic recovery is on a firmer footing and overall conditions
in the labor market appear to be are improving gradually. Household spending and
business investment in equipment and software continue to expand. However, investment
in nonresidential structures is still weak, and the housing sector continues to be depressed.
Commodity prices have risen significantly since the summer, and concerns about global
supplies of crude oil have contributed to a sharp run-up further increase in oil prices in
recent weeks since the Committee met in March. Nonetheless, Inflation has picked up
in recent months, but longer-term inflation expectations have remained [generally] stable
and measures of underlying inflation have been are still subdued.
2. Consistent with its statutory mandate, the Committee seeks to foster maximum employment
and price stability. Currently, The unemployment rate remains elevated and measures of
underlying inflation continue to be somewhat low, relative have moved somewhat closer
to levels that the Committee judges to be consistent, over the longer run, with its dual
s
e
mandate. However, The recent increases in the prices of energy and other commodities are v
i
currently putting upward pressure on are boosting overall inflation. The Committee a t
n
expects these effects to be transitory so long as longer-term inflation expectations r
e
remain stable, but and it will pay close attention to the evolution of inflation and inflation t
l
A
expectations. The Committee continues to anticipate a gradual return to higher levels of
resource utilization in a context of price stability.
3. To promote a stronger pace of economic recovery and to help ensure that inflation, over
time, is at levels consistent with its mandate In light of incoming information, the
Committee judges that the increase in its holdings of longer-term securities since
November is sufficient to promote appropriate progress toward maximum
employment and price stability. Accordingly, the Committee decided today to continue
expanding complete only $450 billion of the intended $600 billion increase in its
holdings of securities as announced in November. In particular For now, the Committee is
maintaining its existing policy of reinvesting principal payments from its securities
holdings and intends to purchase $600 billion of longer-term Treasury securities by the end
of the second quarter of 2011. The Committee will regularly review the pace of its
securities purchases and the overall size of the asset-purchase program needed its
reinvestment policy and the level of its securities holdings in light of incoming
information and will adjust the program make adjustments as needed to best foster
maximum employment and price stability.
4. The Committee will maintain the target range for the federal funds rate at 0 to ¼ percent
and continues to anticipates that economic conditions, including low rates of resource
utilization, subdued inflation trends, and stable inflation expectations, are likely to warrant
exceptionally low levels for the federal funds rate for an extended period some time.
5. The Committee will continue to monitor the economic outlook and financial developments
and will employ its policy tools as necessary to support the economic recovery and to help
ensure that inflation, over time, is at levels consistent with its mandate.