APRIL FOMC STATEMENT—ALTERNATIVE B
1. Information received since the Federal Open Market Committee met in January March
suggests indicates that the economic recovery is on a firmer footing proceeding at a
moderate pace and overall conditions in the labor market appear to be are improving
gradually. Household spending and business investment in equipment and software
continue to expand. However, investment in nonresidential structures is still weak, and the
housing sector continues to be depressed. Commodity prices have risen significantly since
the last summer, and concerns about global supplies of crude oil have contributed to a
sharp run-up further increase in oil prices in recent weeks since the Committee met in
March. Nonetheless, Inflation has picked up in recent months, but longer-term
inflation expectations have remained [generally] stable and measures of underlying
inflation have been are still subdued.
2. Consistent with its statutory mandate, the Committee seeks to foster maximum employment
and price stability. Currently, The unemployment rate remains elevated, and measures of
s underlying inflation continue to be somewhat low, relative to levels that the Committee
e
v judges to be consistent, over the longer run, with its dual mandate. The recent Increases in
i
a t the prices of energy and other commodities are currently putting upward pressure on
n
r inflation. The Committee expects these effects to be transitory, but it will pay close
e
t attention to the evolution of inflation and inflation expectations. The Committee continues
l
A
to anticipate a gradual return to higher levels of resource utilization in a context of price
stability.
3. To promote a stronger pace of economic recovery and to help ensure that inflation, over
time, is at levels consistent with its mandate, the Committee decided today to continue
expanding its holdings of securities as announced in November. In particular, the
Committee is maintaining its existing policy of reinvesting principal payments from its
securities holdings and intends to will complete purchases of $600 billion of longer-term
Treasury securities by the end of the second current quarter of 2011. The Committee will
regularly review the pace size and composition of its securities purchases holdings and the
overall size of the asset-purchase program in light of incoming information and will adjust
the program is prepared to adjust those holdings as needed to best foster maximum
employment and price stability.
4. The Committee will maintain the target range for the federal funds rate at 0 to ¼ percent
and continues to anticipate that economic conditions, including low rates of resource
utilization, subdued inflation trends, and stable inflation expectations, are likely to warrant
exceptionally low levels for the federal funds rate for an extended period.
5. The Committee will continue to monitor the economic outlook and financial developments
and will employ its policy tools as necessary to support the economic recovery and to help
ensure that inflation, over time, is at levels consistent with its mandate.