JANUARY FOMC STATEMENT—ALTERNATIVE A
1. Information received since the Federal Open Market Committee met in November
December confirms that the economic recovery is continuing, though at a rate that has
been insufficient to bring down unemployment about a significant improvement in
labor market conditions. Household spending is increasing at a moderate pace, but
remains constrained by high unemployment, modest income growth, lower housing
wealth, and tight credit. Business spending on equipment and software is rising, though
less rapidly than earlier in the year in recent quarters, while investment in
nonresidential structures continues to be weak. Employers remain reluctant to add to
payrolls. The housing sector continues to be depressed. Longer-term inflation
expectations have remained stable, but measures of underlying inflation have continued
to been trending downward.
2. Consistent with its statutory mandate, the Committee seeks to foster maximum
employment and price stability. Currently, the unemployment rate is elevated, and
measures of underlying inflation are somewhat low, relative to levels that the Committee s
e
judges to be consistent, over the longer run, with its dual mandate. Although the v
i
t
Committee anticipates a gradual return to higher levels of resource utilization in a context a
n
of price stability, progress toward its objectives has been remains disappointingly slow r
e
and there are still significant downside risks to the economic outlook. l t
A
3. To promote a stronger pace of economic recovery and to help ensure that inflation, over
time, is at levels consistent with its mandate, the Committee decided today to continue
expanding its holdings of securities. as announced in November. Moreover, in light of
incoming information, the Committee now intends to increase its holdings of
securities by a total of $800 billion—$200 billion more than announced in
November—by purchasing longer-term Treasury securities at a pace of about $75
billion per month through the third quarter of 2011. In addition, the Committee will
maintain its existing policy of reinvesting principal payments from its securities holdings.
In addition, the Committee intends to purchase $600 billion of longer-term Treasury
securities by the end of the second quarter of 2011, a pace of about $75 billion per month.
The Committee will regularly review the pace of its securities purchases and the overall
size of the asset-purchase program in light of incoming information and will adjust the
program as needed to best foster maximum employment and price stability.
4. The Committee will maintain the target range for the federal funds rate at 0 to ¼ percent
and continues to currently anticipates that economic conditions, including low rates of
resource utilization, subdued inflation trends, and stable inflation expectations, are likely
to warrant exceptionally low levels for the federal funds rate for an extended period at
least through mid-2012.
5. The Committee will continue to monitor the economic outlook and financial
developments and will employ its policy tools as necessary to support the economic
recovery and to help ensure that inflation, over time, is at levels consistent with its
mandate.