DECEMBER FOMC STATEMENT—ALTERNATIVE C
1. Information received since the Federal Open Market Committee met in September
November indicates suggests that the pace of economic growth activity has
strengthened somewhat in the third quarter, reflecting in part a reversal of the temporary
factors that had weighed on growth earlier in the year. Nonetheless, recent indicators
point to continuing weakness in overall labor market conditions, and Although the
unemployment rate remains elevated, it has declined of late, and employment has
continued to increase. Household spending has increased at a somewhat faster pace in
recent months advanced further, and business fixed investment in equipment and
software has continued to expand, but investment in nonresidential structures is still
weak, and the housing sector remains depressed. Inflation appears to have has
moderated only somewhat since earlier in the year, despite a decline in the as prices of
energy and some commodities have declined from their peaks. Longer-term inflation
expectations have remained stable.
s
e
v
i
t
a 2. Consistent with its statutory mandate, the Committee seeks to foster maximum
n
r employment and price stability. The Committee continues to expects a moderate pace
e
t
l some strengthening of economic growth over coming quarters and consequently
A
anticipates that the unemployment rate will decline only gradually toward levels that the
Committee judges to be consistent with its dual mandate. Moreover, there are significant
downside risks to the economic outlook, including strains in global financial markets.
The Committee also anticipates that inflation will settle, over coming quarters, at levels at
or below those consistent with the Committee’s dual mandate as the effects of past
energy and other commodity price increases dissipate further. However, the Committee
will continue to pay close attention to the evolution of inflation and inflation
expectations.
3. To support a stronger the economic recovery and to while helping to ensure that
inflation, over time, is at does not exceed levels that are consistent with the dual
mandate, the Committee decided today to continue its reduce by half the size of the
program to extend the average maturity of its holdings of securities as that it announced
in September. In particular, the Committee intends to limit purchases and sales of
securities under this program to $200 billion each and to complete these operations
by the end of March 2012. The Committee is maintaining its existing policies of
reinvesting principal payments from its holdings of agency debt and agency mortgage-
backed securities in agency mortgage-backed securities and of rolling over maturing
Treasury securities at auction. The Committee will regularly review the size and
composition of its securities holdings and is prepared to adjust those holdings as
appropriate.
4. The Committee also decided to keep the target range for the federal funds rate at 0 to ¼
percent and currently now anticipates that economic conditions—including low rates of
resource utilization and a subdued outlook for inflation over the medium run—are likely
to warrant exceptionally low levels for the federal funds rate at least through mid-2013
2012.
 
 
 
5. The Committee will continue to assess the economic outlook in light of incoming
information and is prepared to employ its tools as appropriate to promote a stronger
economic recovery in a context of price stability its objectives of maximum
employment and stable prices.
s
e
v
i
t
a
n
r
e
t
l
A