DECEMBER FOMC STATEMENT—ALTERNATIVE A
1. Information received since the Federal Open Market Committee met in September
November indicates suggests that economic growth strengthened somewhat in the third
quarter, reflecting in part a reversal of the temporary factors that had weighed on growth
earlier in the year the economy has been expanding modestly, while global growth
appears to be slowing. Nonetheless Although recent indicators point to continuing
weakness some improvement in overall labor market conditions, and the unemployment
rate remains elevated. Household spending has increased at a somewhat faster pace in
recent months. continued to advance, but business fixed investment in equipment and
software has continued to expand appears to be increasing less rapidly but investment
in nonresidential structures is still weak, and the housing sector remains depressed.
Inflation appears to have has moderated since earlier in the year, as prices of energy and
some commodities have declined from their peaks. and longer-term inflation
expectations have remained stable.
s
e
v
i
2. Consistent with its statutory mandate, the Committee seeks to foster maximum a t
n
employment and price stability. The Committee continues to expects that, absent r
e
further policy action, a moderate the pace of economic growth would remain modest l t
A
over coming quarters and consequently anticipates that the unemployment rate will
would decline only very gradually toward levels that the Committee judges to be
consistent with its dual mandate. Moreover, there are significant downside risks to the
economic outlook, including strains in global financial markets. the Committee also
anticipates that inflation will would settle, over coming quarters, at levels at or below
those consistent with the Committee’s dual mandate as the effects of past energy and
other commodity price increases dissipate further. Strains in global financial markets
continue to pose significant downside risks to the economic outlook, and the risks to
the outlook for inflation also appear to be tilted to the downside. However, the
Committee will continue to pay close attention to the evolution of inflation and inflation
expectations.
3. To support a stronger economic recovery and to help ensure that inflation, over time, is at
levels consistent with the dual mandate, the Committee decided today to purchase a
further $500 billion of agency mortgage-backed securities by the end of December
2012. In addition, the Committee intends to continue its program to extend the
average maturity of its holdings of securities as announced in September. The
Committee is also maintaining its existing policies of reinvesting principal payments
from its holdings of agency debt and agency mortgage-backed securities in agency
mortgage-backed securities and of rolling over maturing Treasury securities at auction.
These programs should put downward pressure on longer-term interest rates,
provide support to mortgage markets, and help make broader financial conditions
more accommodative. The Committee will regularly review the size and composition
of its securities holdings and is prepared to adjust those holdings as appropriate.
OR
 
 
 
3′. To support a stronger economic recovery and to help ensure that inflation, over time, is at
levels consistent with the dual mandate, the Committee decided today to undertake a
program of purchases of agency mortgage-backed securities. The Committee has
initially authorized purchases of agency mortgage-backed securities of $40 billion
per month, and will adjust this program as needed to foster its objectives of
maximum employment and stable prices. In addition, the Committee will continue
its program to extend the average maturity of its holdings of securities as announced in
September. The Committee is also maintaining its existing policies of reinvesting
principal payments from its holdings of agency debt and agency mortgage-backed
securities in agency mortgage-backed securities and of rolling over maturing Treasury
securities at auction. These programs should put downward pressure on longer-term
interest rates, provide support to mortgage markets, and help make broader
financial conditions more accommodative. The Committee will regularly review the
size and composition of its securities holdings and is prepared to adjust those holdings as
appropriate.
s
e
v
i
t 4. The Committee also decided to keep the target range for the federal funds rate at 0 to ¼
a
n
r percent. and currently The Committee now anticipates that economic conditions—
e
t including low rates of resource utilization and a subdued outlook for inflation over the
l
A
medium run—are likely to warrant this exceptionally low levels range for the federal
funds rate at least through mid-2013 the end of 2014. Specifically, given its anticipated
path for monetary policy, the Committee currently projects that the unemployment
rate will be roughly [ 7 ] percent and the inflation rate (as measured by the price
index for personal consumption expenditures) will be around [ 2 ] percent at the end
of 2014.
5. The Committee will continue to assess monitor the economic outlook in light of
incoming information and financial developments and is prepared to employ its tools to
promote a stronger economic recovery in a context of price stability.