JANUARY FOMC STATEMENT—ALTERNATIVE C
1. Information received since the Federal Open Market Committee met in November
December confirms that the economic recovery is continuing, though at a rate that has
been insufficient to bring down unemployment about a significant improvement in
labor market conditions. Growth in household spending is increasing at a moderate
pace has picked up but remains constrained by high unemployment, modest income
growth, lower housing wealth, and tight credit. Business spending on equipment and
software is rising, though less rapidly than earlier in the year, while investment in
nonresidential structures continues to be weak. and business investment is rising.
However, employers remain reluctant to add to payrolls and the housing sector continues
to be depressed. Although commodity prices have risen, longer-term inflation
expectations have remained stable, but and measures of underlying inflation have been
trending downward.
2. Consistent with its statutory mandate, the Committee seeks to foster maximum
employment and price stability. Currently, the unemployment rate is elevated, and s
e
measures of underlying inflation are somewhat low, relative to levels that the Committee v
i
t
judges to be consistent, over the longer run, with its dual mandate. Although the a
n
Committee anticipates a gradual return to higher levels of resource utilization in a context r
e
of price stability, Progress toward the Committee’s objectives has been disappointingly l t
A
slow, but there are some indications that the economic recovery is strengthening.
3. To promote a stronger pace of economic recovery and to help ensure that inflation, over
time, is at levels consistent with its mandate, the Committee decided today to continue
expanding its holdings of securities. as announced in November. However, in light of
incoming information, the Committee now intends to increase its holdings of
securities by a total of $400 billion—$200 billion less than announced in
November—by purchasing longer-term Treasury securities at a pace of about $50
billion per month through the second quarter of 2011. The Committee will maintain
its existing policy of reinvesting principal payments from its securities holdings. In
addition, the Committee intends to purchase $600 billion of longer-term Treasury
securities by the end of the second quarter of 2011, a pace of about $75 billion per month.
The Committee will regularly review the pace of its securities purchases and the overall
size of the asset-purchase program in light of incoming information and will adjust the
program as needed to best foster maximum employment and price stability.
4. The Committee will maintain the target range for the federal funds rate at 0 to ¼ percent
and continues to anticipate that economic conditions, including low rates of resource
utilization, subdued inflation trends, and stable inflation expectations, are likely to
warrant exceptionally low levels for the federal funds rate for an extended period.
5. The Committee will continue to monitor the economic outlook and financial
developments and will employ its policy tools as necessary to support the economic
recovery and to help ensure that inflation, over time, is at levels [of 2 percent or a bit
less, which the Committee judges to be] consistent with its mandate.