AUGUST FOMC STATEMENT—ALTERNATIVE A
1. Information received since the Federal Open Market Committee met in April June
indicates that the economic growth so far this year recovery is continuing at a
moderate pace, though somewhat more slowly has been considerably slower than
the Committee had expected. Also, Recent indicators continue to suggest a
deterioration in overall labor market conditions, have been weaker than anticipated
and the unemployment rate has moved up. The slower pace of the recovery
reflects in part factors that are likely to be temporary, including the damping effect of
higher food and energy prices on consumer purchasing power and spending as well as
supply chain disruptions associated with the tragic events in Japan. Household
spending has flattened out, investment in nonresidential structures is still weak,
and the housing sector remains depressed. However, and business investment in
equipment and software continues to expand. However, investment in nonresidential
structures is still weak, and the housing sector continues to be depressed.
Temporary factors, including the damping effect of higher food and energy s
e
prices on consumer purchasing power and spending as well as supply chain v
i
t
disruptions associated with the tragic events in Japan, appear to account for a
n
r
only some of the recent weakness in economic activity. Inflation has picked up e
t
earlier in the year recent months, mainly reflecting higher prices for some A l
commodities and imported goods, as well as the recent supply chain disruptions.
More recently, inflation has moderated as prices of energy and some
commodities have declined somewhat from their earlier peaks. However,
Longer-term inflation expectations have remained stable.
2. Consistent with its statutory mandate, the Committee seeks to foster maximum
employment and price stability. The unemployment rate remains elevated; however,
The Committee now expects the a somewhat slower pace of recovery to pick up over
coming quarters and anticipates that the unemployment rate to resume its gradual
will decline only gradually toward levels that the Committee judges to be consistent
with its dual mandate. Moreover, downside risks to the economic outlook have
increased. Inflation has moved up recently, but The Committee also anticipates that
inflation will settle, over coming quarters, at subside to levels at or below those
consistent with the Committee's dual mandate as the effects of past energy and other
commodity price increases dissipate further. However, the Committee will continue
to pay close attention to the evolution of inflation and inflation expectations.
3. To promote the ongoing economic recovery and to help ensure that inflation, over
time, is at levels consistent with its mandate, the Committee decided today to keep the
target range for the federal funds rate at 0 to ¼ percent. The Committee continues to
currently anticipates that economic conditions—including low rates of resource
utilization and a subdued outlook for inflation over the medium run—are likely to
warrant exceptionally low levels for the federal funds rate at least through mid-2013
for an extended period.
 
 
 
4. In order to provide greater support for the economic recovery, the Committee
also decided to adjust the composition of its securities holdings. Over the next 12
months, the Committee will purchase $400 billion of Treasury securities with
remaining maturities of 7 years to 30 years and sell an equal amount of Treasury
securities with remaining maturities of 3 years or less. Lengthening the average
duration of the Federal Reserve’s securities portfolio should put downward
pressure on longer-term interest rates in private credit markets and thereby
support growth in private demand for goods and services. The Committee also
will complete its purchases of $600 billion of longer-term Treasury securities by the
end of this month and will maintain its existing policy of reinvesting principal
payments from its securities holdings and, going forward, will use the proceeds to
purchase only Treasury securities with remaining maturities of 7 years to 30
years. The Committee will regularly review the size and composition of its securities
holdings and is prepared to adjust those holdings further if needed as appropriate.
5. The Committee will monitor carefully assess the economic outlook in light of
s
e
v incoming information and financial developments and will employ its policy tools
i
t
a as appropriate to best foster maximum employment and price stability.
n
r
e
t
l
A