JANUARY FOMC STATEMENT—ALTERNATIVE D
1. Information received since the Federal Open Market Committee met in November
December confirms that the economic recovery is continuing. though at a rate that has
been insufficient to bring down unemployment. Growth in household spending is
increasing at a moderate pace has picked up but remains constrained by high
unemployment, modest income growth, lower housing wealth, and tight credit. Business
spending on equipment and software is rising, though less rapidly than earlier in the year,
while investment in nonresidential structures continues to be weak. Employers remain
reluctant to add to payrolls. The housing sector continues to be depressed. and business
investment is rising. Measures of underlying inflation have trended lower in recent
quarters and longer-term inflation expectations have remained stable, but measures of
underlying inflation have continued to trend downward. commodity prices have risen
noticeably.
2. Consistent with its statutory mandate, the Committee seeks to foster maximum
s employment and price stability. Currently, the unemployment rate is elevated, and
e
v measures of underlying inflation are somewhat low, relative to levels that the Committee
i
t
a judges to be consistent, over the longer run, with its dual mandate. Although the
n
r Committee anticipates a gradual return to higher levels of resource utilization in a context
e
t
l of price stability, progress toward its objectives has been disappointingly slow.
A
2. To promote a stronger pace of support the economic recovery and to help ensure that
inflation, over time, is at levels consistent with its mandate, the Committee will
maintain the target range for the federal funds rate at 0 to ¼ percent and anticipates
that economic conditions are likely to warrant low levels for the federal funds rate
for some time. However, the Committee judges that a further expansion of its
securities holdings is not necessary to support a gradual return to higher levels of
resource utilization in a context of price stability. Accordingly, the Committee
decided today to continue expanding discontinue the asset purchase program it its
holdings of securities as announced in November. For the time being, the Committee
will maintain its existing policy of reinvesting principal payments from its securities
holdings. In addition, the Committee intends to purchase $600 billion of longer-term
Treasury securities by the end of the second quarter of 2011, a pace of about $75 billion
per month. The Committee will regularly review the pace of its securities purchases and
the overall size of the asset-purchase program in light of incoming information and will
adjust the program as needed to best foster maximum employment and price stability.
3. The Committee will maintain the target range for the federal funds rate at 0 to ¼ percent
and continues to anticipate that economic conditions, including low rates of resource
utilization, subdued inflation trends, and stable inflation expectations, are likely to
warrant exceptionally low levels for the federal funds rate for an extended period.
3. The Committee will continue to monitor the economic outlook and financial
developments and will employ its policy tools as necessary to support the economic
recovery and to help ensure that inflation, over time, is at levels consistent with its
mandate promote maximum employment and price stability.