NOVEMBER FOMC STATEMENT—ALTERNATIVE C
1. Information received since the Federal Open Market Committee met in August September
indicates that economic growth remains slow of late has been somewhat stronger than the
Committee had expected. Recent indicators point to continuing weakness in overall labor
market conditions, and Although the unemployment rate remains elevated, household
spending has been increaseding at only a modest a faster pace in recent months despite some
recovery in sales of motor vehicles as supply-chain disruptions have eased. However,
Business investment in equipment and software continues to expand, and investment in
nonresidential structures is still weak has increased. and The housing sector remains
depressed. Inflation appears to have moderated only somewhat since earlier in the year,
despite a decline in the as prices of energy and some commodities have declined from their
peaks. Longer-term inflation expectations have remained stable.
2. Consistent with its statutory mandate, the Committee seeks to foster maximum employment
and price stability. The Committee continues to expect some pickup in the a moderate pace s
e
v
of recovery growth over coming quarters but and anticipates that the unemployment rate i
t
a
will decline only gradually toward levels that the Committee judges to be consistent with its n
r
dual mandate. Moreover, there are significant downside risks to the economic outlook, e
t
l
including strains in global financial markets. The Committee also anticipates that inflation A
will settle, over coming quarters, at levels at or below those consistent with the Committee's
dual mandate as the effects of past energy and other commodity price increases dissipate
further. However, the Committee will continue to pay close attention to the evolution of
inflation and inflation expectations.
3. T o support a stronger economic recovery and to help ensure that inflation, over time, is at
levels consistent with the dual mandate In light of the recent improvement in the economic
outlook, the Committee decided today to reduce by half the size of the program to extend
the average maturity of its holdings of securities that it announced in September. The
Committee intends to purchase, by the end of June 2012, $400 billion of Treasury securities
with remaining maturities of 6 years to 30 years and to sell an equal amount of Treasury
securities with remaining maturities of 3 years or less. This program should put downward
pressure on longer-term interest rates and help make broader financial conditions more
accommodative. In particular, the Committee intends to limit purchases and sales of
securities under this program to $200 billion each and to complete these operations by
the end of March 2012. To help support conditions in mortgage markets, The Committee
will now is maintaining its existing policies of reinvesting principal payments from its
holdings of agency debt and agency mortgage-backed securities in agency mortgage-backed
securities. In addition the Committee will maintain its existing policy and of rolling over
maturing Treasury securities at auction. The Committee will regularly review the size and
composition of its securities holdings and is prepared to adjust those holdings as appropriate.
4. The Committee also decided to keep the target range for the federal funds rate at 0 to ¼
percent and currently, now anticipates that economic conditions—including low rates of
resource utilization and a subdued outlook for inflation over the medium run—are likely to
warrant exceptionally low levels for the federal funds rate at least [ through 2012 mid-2013 |
for the next four quarters ].
 
 
 
5. The Committee discussed the range of policy tools available to promote a stronger economic
recovery in the context of price stability. It will continue to assess the economic outlook in
light of incoming information and is prepared to employ its tools as appropriate to promote
its objectives of maximum employment and stable prices.
s
e
v
i
t
a
n
r
e
t
l
A