JANUARY FOMC STATEMENT—ALTERNATIVE B
1. Information received since the Federal Open Market Committee met in November
December confirms that the economic recovery is continuing, though at a rate that has
been insufficient to bring down unemployment about a significant improvement in
labor market conditions. Growth in household spending is increasing at a moderate
pace picked up late last year, but remains constrained by high unemployment, modest
income growth, lower housing wealth, and tight credit. Business spending on equipment
and software is rising, though less rapidly than earlier in the year, while investment in
nonresidential structures continues to be is still weak. Employers remain reluctant to add
to payrolls. The housing sector continues to be depressed. Although commodity prices
have risen, longer-term inflation expectations have remained stable, but and measures of
underlying inflation have been trending downward.
2. Consistent with its statutory mandate, the Committee seeks to foster maximum
employment and price stability. Currently, the unemployment rate is elevated, and
s measures of underlying inflation are somewhat low, relative to levels that the Committee
e
v judges to be consistent, over the longer run, with its dual mandate. Although the
i
t
a Committee anticipates a gradual return to higher levels of resource utilization in the
n
r context of price stability, progress toward its objectives has been disappointingly slow.
e
t
l
A 3. To promote a stronger pace of economic recovery and to help ensure that inflation, over
time, is at levels consistent with its mandate, the Committee decided today to continue
expanding its holdings of securities as announced in November. In particular, the
Committee will is maintaining its existing policy of reinvesting principal payments from
its securities holdings. In addition, the Committee and intends to purchase $600 billion
of longer-term Treasury securities by the end of the second quarter of 2011, a pace of
about $75 billion per month. The Committee will continued its practice of regularly
reviewing the pace of its securities purchases and the overall size of the asset-purchase
program in light of incoming information, and will it remains prepared to adjust the
program as needed to best foster maximum employment and price stability.
4. The Committee will maintain the target range for the federal funds rate at 0 to ¼ percent
and continues to anticipate that economic conditions, including low rates of resource
utilization, subdued inflation trends, and stable inflation expectations, are likely to
warrant exceptionally low levels for the federal funds rate for an extended period.
5. The Committee will continue to monitor the economic outlook and financial
developments and will employ its policy tools as necessary to support the economic
recovery and to help ensure that inflation, over time, is at levels consistent with its
mandate.