DECEMBER FOMC STATEMENT—ALTERNATIVE B
1. Information received since the Federal Open Market Committee met in September
November indicates suggests that economic growth strengthened somewhat in the third
quarter, reflecting in part a reversal of the temporary factors that had weighed on growth
earlier in the year the economy has been expanding moderately, notwithstanding
some apparent slowing in global growth. Nonetheless While recent indicators point to
continuing weakness some improvement in overall labor market conditions, and the
unemployment rate remains elevated. Household spending has increased at a somewhat
faster pace in recent months. continued to advance, but business fixed investment in
equipment and software has continued to expand appears to be increasing less rapidly
but investment in nonresidential structures is still weak, and the housing sector remains
depressed. Inflation appears to have has moderated since earlier in the year, as prices of
energy and some commodities have declined from their peaks. and longer-term inflation
expectations have remained stable.
s
e
v
i
2. Consistent with its statutory mandate, the Committee seeks to foster maximum a t
n
employment and price stability. The Committee continues to expect a moderate pace of r
e
economic growth over coming quarters and consequently anticipates that the l t
A
unemployment rate will decline only gradually toward levels that the Committee judges
to be consistent with its dual mandate. Moreover, there are Strains in global financial
markets continue to pose significant downside risks to the economic outlook, including
strains in global financial markets. The Committee also anticipates that inflation will
settle, over coming quarters, at levels at or below those consistent with the Committee’s
dual mandate as the effects of past energy and other commodity price increases dissipate
further. However, the Committee will continue to pay close attention to the evolution of
inflation and inflation expectations.
3. To support a stronger economic recovery and to help ensure that inflation, over time, is at
levels consistent with the dual mandate, the Committee decided today to continue its
program to extend the average maturity of its holdings of securities as announced in
September. The Committee is maintaining its existing policies of reinvesting principal
payments from its holdings of agency debt and agency mortgage-backed securities in
agency mortgage-backed securities and of rolling over maturing Treasury securities at
auction. The Committee will regularly review the size and composition of its securities
holdings and is prepared to adjust those holdings as appropriate.
4. The Committee also decided to keep the target range for the federal funds rate at 0 to ¼
percent and currently anticipates that economic conditions—including low rates of
resource utilization and a subdued outlook for inflation over the medium run—are likely
to warrant exceptionally low levels for the federal funds rate at least through mid-2013.
5. The Committee will continue to assess monitor the economic outlook in light of
incoming information and financial developments and is prepared to employ its tools to
promote a stronger economic recovery in a context of price stability.