APRIL FOMC STATEMENT—ALTERNATIVE C
1. Information received since the Federal Open Market Committee met in January
March suggests that the economy has been expanding moderately economic
recovery has continued to strengthen. Labor market conditions have improved
further; the unemployment rate has declined notably in recent months but remains
elevated somewhat more, and private payrolls have expanded moderately on
average in recent months. Household spending and business fixed investment
have continued to advance. The housing sector remains depressed but has shown
some signs of improvement. Sizable increases in the prices of crude oil and
gasoline have pushed up inflation somewhat has been subdued in recent months,
although prices of crude oil and gasoline have increased lately. Longer-term
inflation expectations have remained stable.
2. Consistent with its statutory mandate, the Committee seeks to foster maximum
employment and price stability. The Committee expects moderate economic
growth over coming quarters to pick up over time and consequently anticipates s
e
v
that the unemployment rate will decline gradually move appreciably closer, over i
t
a
the next few years, to toward levels that the Committee judges to be consistent n
r
with its dual mandate. Strains in global financial markets have eased, though they e
t
l
continue to pose significant downside risks to the economic outlook. The recent A
increase in oil and gasoline prices earlier this year will push up is expected to
affect inflation only temporarily, but; the Committee anticipates that
subsequently, with appropriate monetary policy, inflation over the medium
term will run at or below close to the rate that it judges most consistent with its
dual mandate.
3.1 To support a stronger sustainable economic recovery and to help ensure that
inflation, over time, is at the rate most consistent with its dual mandate, the
Committee expects to maintain a highly accommodative stance for monetary
policy. In particular, the Committee decided today to keep the target range for the
federal funds rate at 0 to ¼ percent and currently anticipates that economic
conditions—including low rates of resource utilization and a subdued outlook for
inflation over the medium run—are likely to warrant exceptionally low levels for
the federal funds rate at least through late 2014. In judging when to first
increase its target for the federal funds rate, the Committee will consider a
range of factors, including rates of resource utilization, the projected pace of
improvement in labor market conditions, the contours of the medium-run
inflation outlook, the stability of longer-run inflation expectations, and the
balance of risks that could impede the attainment of the Committee’s goals.
OR
3.2 To support a stronger sustainable economic recovery and to help ensure that
inflation, over time, is at the rate most consistent with its dual mandate, the
Committee expects to maintain a highly accommodative stance for monetary
policy. In particular, the Committee decided today to keep the target range for the
federal funds rate at 0 to ¼ percent and. In light of the improvement in the
economic outlook, the Committee currently now anticipates that economic
 
 
 
conditions—including low rates of resource utilization and a subdued outlook for
inflation over the medium run—are likely to warrant exceptionally low levels for
the federal funds rate at least through late 2014 until mid-2013.
4. The Committee also decided to continue its complete in June the program to
extend the average maturity of its holdings of securities as that it announced in
September. The Committee is maintaining its existing policies of reinvesting
principal payments from its holdings of agency debt and agency mortgage-backed
securities in agency mortgage-backed securities and of rolling over maturing
Treasury securities at auction. The Committee will regularly review the size and
composition of its securities holdings and is prepared to adjust those holdings as
appropriate necessary to promote a stronger economic recovery in a context of
maximum employment and price stability.
s
e
v
i
t
a
n
r
e
t
l
A