APRIL FOMC STATEMENT—ALTERNATIVE B
1. Information received since the Federal Open Market Committee met in January
March suggests that the economy has been expanding moderately. Labor market
conditions have improved further in recent months; the unemployment rate has
declined notably in recent months but remains elevated. Household spending and
business fixed investment have continued to advance. Despite some tentative
signs of improvement, the housing sector remains depressed. Inflation has been
subdued picked up somewhat in recent months, although mainly reflecting
higher prices of crude oil and gasoline have increased lately. However, longer-
term inflation expectations have remained stable.
2. Consistent with its statutory mandate, the Committee seeks to foster maximum
employment and price stability. The Committee expects moderate economic
growth to remain moderate over coming quarters and then to pick up
gradually, supported by highly accommodative monetary policy.
s Consequently, the Committee anticipates that the unemployment rate will decline
e
v
i gradually toward levels that the Committee it judges to be consistent with its dual
t
a
n mandate. Strains in global financial markets have eased, though they continue to
r
e pose significant downside risks to the economic outlook. The recent increase in
t
l
A oil and gasoline prices earlier this year will push up is expected to affect
inflation only temporarily, but and the Committee anticipates that subsequently
inflation will run at or below the rate that it judges most consistent with its dual
mandate.
3. To support a stronger economic recovery and to help ensure that inflation, over
time, is at the rate most consistent with its dual mandate, the Committee expects
to maintain a highly accommodative stance for monetary policy. In particular, the
Committee decided today to keep the target range for the federal funds rate at 0 to
¼ percent and currently anticipates that economic conditions—including low rates
of resource utilization and a subdued outlook for inflation over the medium run—
are likely to warrant exceptionally low levels for the federal funds rate at least
through late 2014.
4. The Committee also decided to continue its program to extend the average
maturity of its holdings of securities as announced in September. The Committee
is maintaining its existing policies of reinvesting principal payments from its
holdings of agency debt and agency mortgage-backed securities in agency
mortgage-backed securities and of rolling over maturing Treasury securities at
auction. The Committee will regularly review the size and composition of its
securities holdings and is prepared to adjust those holdings as appropriate to
promote a stronger economic recovery in a context of price stability.