APRIL FOMC STATEMENT—ALTERNATIVE A
1. Information received since the Federal Open Market Committee met in January
March suggests that the economy has been expanding moderately. Labor market
conditions have improved further in recent months; the unemployment rate has
declined notably in recent months but remains elevated. Household spending and
business fixed investment have continued to advance. The housing sector remains
depressed. Inflation has been subdued picked up somewhat in recent months,
although mainly reflecting higher prices of crude oil and gasoline have increased
lately. However, longer-term inflation expectations have remained stable.
2. Consistent with its statutory mandate, the Committee seeks to foster maximum
employment and price stability. The Committee expects moderate anticipates
that, absent further policy stimulus, economic growth over coming quarters
would be unacceptably slow and consequently anticipates that the
unemployment rate will would decline only very gradually toward levels that the
s Committee judges to be consistent with its dual mandate. Strains in global
e
v
i financial markets have eased, though they continue to pose significant downside
t
a
n risks to the economic outlook. The recent increase in oil and gasoline prices
r
e earlier this year will push up is reducing consumers’ purchasing power while
t
l
A boosting inflation temporarily, but the Committee anticipates that subsequently
inflation will run at or below the rate that it judges most consistent with its dual
mandate.
3.1 To support a stronger economic recovery and to help ensure that inflation, over
time, is at the rate most consistent with its dual mandate, the Committee expects
to maintain a highly accommodative stance for monetary policy. In particular, the
Committee decided today to continue expand its program to extend the average
maturity of its holdings of securities as announced in September. After
completing the transactions that it announced last September, the Committee
intends to purchase, between July 2012 and the end of March 2013, an
additional $400 billion of Treasury securities with remaining maturities of 6
years to 30 years, and to sell an equal amount of Treasury securities with
remaining maturities of 4 years or less. These transactions should put
downward pressure on longer-term interest rates and help to make broader
financial conditions more accommodative. The Committee is maintaining its
existing policies of reinvesting principal payments from its holdings of agency
debt and agency mortgage-backed securities in agency mortgage-backed
securities and of rolling over maturing Treasury securities at auction. The
Committee will regularly review the size and composition of its securities
holdings and is prepared to adjust those holdings as appropriate to promote a
stronger economic recovery in a context of price stability.
OR
3.2 To support a stronger economic recovery and to help ensure that inflation, over
time, is at the rate most consistent with its dual mandate, the Committee expects
to maintain a highly accommodative stance for monetary policy. In particular, the
Committee decided today to continue its purchase an additional $500 billion of
 
 
 
agency mortgage-backed securities by the end of April 2013. The Committee
also will complete the program to extend the average maturity of its holdings of
securities as that it announced in September. These transactions should put
downward pressure on longer-term interest rates, support mortgage
markets, and help to make broader financial conditions more
accommodative. The Committee is maintaining its existing policies of
reinvesting principal payments from its holdings of agency debt and agency
mortgage-backed securities in agency mortgage-backed securities and of rolling
over maturing Treasury securities at auction. The Committee will regularly
review the size and composition of its securities holdings and is prepared to adjust
those holdings as appropriate to promote a stronger economic recovery in a
context of price stability.
4. The Committee also decided to keep the target range for the federal funds rate at 0
to ¼ percent and currently anticipates that economic conditions —including low
rates of resource utilization and a subdued outlook for inflation over the medium
run— are likely to warrant exceptionally low levels for the federal funds rate at s
e
least through late 2014. v
i
t
a
n
5. In judging the appropriate stance of monetary policy, the Committee will r
e
consider a range of factors, including rates of resource utilization, the l t
A
projected pace of improvement in labor market conditions, the contours of
the medium-run inflation outlook, the stability of longer-run inflation
expectations, and the balance of risks that could impede the attainment of the
Committee’s goals.