AUGUST FOMC STATEMENT—ALTERNATIVE C
1. Information received since the Federal Open Market Committee met in April June
suggests that the economy has been expanding moderately this year. However,
growth in employment has slowed in recent months, and the unemployment rate
remains elevated. Employment has shown further gains. Business fixed
investment Private domestic demand has continued to advance, Household spending
appears to be rising at a somewhat slower pace than earlier in the year. Despite and
the housing sector remains depressed has shown some signs of improvement.
Inflation has declined since earlier this year, mainly reflecting lower prices of crude
oil and gasoline, and longer-term inflation expectations have remained stable.
2. Consistent with its statutory mandate, the Committee seeks to foster maximum
employment and price stability. The Committee expects economic growth to remain
moderate over coming quarters and then to pick up very gradually. Consequently, the
Committee anticipates that the unemployment rate will decline only slowly toward
s
e levels that it judges to be consistent with its dual mandate. Furthermore, strains in
v
t i global financial markets [ continue to | and issues relating to U.S. fiscal policy ]
a
n
pose significant downside risks to the economic outlook. The Committee anticipates
r
e
t that inflation over the medium term will run at or below about the rate that it judges
l
A
most consistent with its dual mandate.
3. To support a stronger the economic recovery and to help ensure that inflation, over
time, is at the rate most consistent with its dual mandate, the Committee expects to
maintain a highly accommodative stance for monetary policy. In particular, the
Committee decided today to keep the target range for the federal funds rate at 0 to ¼
percent and currently anticipates that economic conditions—including low rates of
resource utilization and a subdued outlook for inflation over the medium run—are
likely to warrant exceptionally low levels for the federal funds rate at least through
late [ 2013 | 2014 ].
OR
3'. To support a stronger sustainable economic recovery and to help ensure that
inflation, over time, is at the rate most consistent with its dual mandate, the
Committee expects to maintain a highly accommodative stance for monetary policy.
In particular, the Committee decided today to keep the target range for the federal
funds rate at 0 to ¼ percent and currently anticipates that economic conditions—
including low rates of resource utilization and a subdued outlook for inflation over
the medium run—are likely to warrant exceptionally low levels for the federal funds
rate at least through late 2014. As rates of resource utilization rise toward levels
consistent with maximum employment, the Committee eventually will need to
make monetary policy less accommodative in order to ensure that the economy
expands at a sustainable pace and to prevent inflation from persistently
exceeding its longer-run objective. In determining the appropriate time to
increase its target for the federal funds rate, the Committee will consider a range
of factors, including actual and projected labor market conditions, the medium-
term outlook for inflation, and the risks to the achievement of the Committee’s
objectives.
 
 
 
4. The Committee also decided to continue through the end of the year its program to
extend the average maturity of its holdings of securities as announced in June
Specifically, the Committee intends to purchase Treasury securities with remaining
maturities of 6 years to 30 years at the current pace and to sell or redeem an equal
amount of Treasury securities with remaining maturities of approximately 3 years or
less. This continuation of the maturity extension program should put downward
pressure on longer-term interest rates and help to make broader financial conditions
more accommodative. The Committee is maintaining and to maintain its existing
policy of reinvesting principal payments from its holdings of agency debt and agency
mortgage-backed securities in agency mortgage-backed securities. The Committee
will regularly review the size and composition of its securities holdings and is
prepared to take further action as appropriate adjust those holdings as necessary to
promote maximum employment and a stronger economic recovery and sustained
improvement in labor market conditions in a context of price stability.
s
e
v
i
t
a
n
r
e
t
l
A