MARCH FOMC STATEMENT—ALTERNATIVE B
1. Information received since the Federal Open Market Committee met in December
January suggests that the economy has been expanding moderately,
notwithstanding some slowing in global growth. While indicators point to some
further improvement in overall Labor market conditions have improved further;
the unemployment rate has declined notably in recent months but remains
elevated. Household spending and business fixed investment have continued to
advance. but growth in business fixed investment has slowed, and The housing
sector remains depressed. Inflation has been subdued in recent months, and
although prices of crude oil and gasoline have increased lately. Longer-term
inflation expectations have remained stable.
2. Consistent with its statutory mandate, the Committee seeks to foster maximum
employment and price stability. The Committee expects moderate economic
growth over coming quarters to be modest and consequently anticipates that the
s
unemployment rate will decline only gradually toward levels that the Committee e
v
judges to be consistent with its dual mandate. Strains in global financial markets, t i
a
while having eased somewhat, continue to pose significant downside risks to the n
r
e
economic outlook. The recent increase in oil and gasoline prices will push up t
l
A
inflation temporarily, but the Committee also anticipates that over coming
quarters subsequently inflation will run at levels at or below those the rate that
it judges most consistent with the Committee's its dual mandate.
3. To support a stronger economic recovery and to help ensure that inflation, over
time, is at levels the rate most consistent with the its dual mandate, the
Committee expects to maintain a highly accommodative stance for monetary
policy. In particular, the Committee decided today to keep the target range for the
federal funds rate at 0 to ¼ percent and currently anticipates that economic
conditions—including low rates of resource utilization and a subdued outlook for
inflation over the medium run—are likely to warrant exceptionally low levels for
the federal funds rate at least through late 2014.
4. The Committee also decided to continue its program to extend the average
maturity of its holdings of securities as announced in September. The Committee
is maintaining its existing policies of reinvesting principal payments from its
holdings of agency debt and agency mortgage-backed securities in agency
mortgage-backed securities and of rolling over maturing Treasury securities at
auction. The Committee will regularly review the size and composition of its
securities holdings and is prepared to adjust those holdings as appropriate to
promote a stronger economic recovery in a context of price stability.