OCTOBER FOMC STATEMENT—ALTERNATIVE A
1. Information received since the Federal Open Market Committee met in August
September suggests that economic activity has continued to expand at a moderate pace
in recent months. Growth in employment has been slow, and the unemployment rate
remains elevated. Household spending has continued to advance, but growth in business
fixed investment appears to have has slowed. The housing sector has shown some
further signs of improvement, albeit from a depressed level. Inflation has been subdued,
although the prices of some key commodities have increased recently picked up
somewhat, reflecting higher energy prices. Longer-term inflation expectations have
remained stable.
2. Consistent with its statutory mandate, the Committee seeks to foster maximum
employment and price stability. The Committee is remains concerned that, without
further policy accommodation, economic growth might not be strong enough to generate
sustained improvement in labor market conditions. Furthermore, strains in global
s financial markets continue to pose significant downside risks to the economic outlook.
e
v The Committee also anticipates that inflation over the medium term likely would run at
i
t
a or below its 2 percent objective.
n
r
e 3. To support a stronger economic recovery and to help ensure that inflation, over time, is at
t
l
A the rate most consistent with its dual mandate, the Committee agreed today to increase
policy accommodation by continue purchasing additional agency mortgage-backed
securities at a pace of $40 billion per month after the end of the year. The Committee
also will continue through the end of the year agreed to purchase longer-term
Treasury securities at a pace of $45 billion per month after its program to extend the
average maturity of its holdings of Treasury securities as announced in June, and it ends
in December. The Committee is maintaining its existing policy of reinvesting principal
payments from its holdings of agency debt and agency mortgage-backed securities in
agency mortgage-backed securities. These actions, which together will increase the
Committee’s holdings of longer-term securities by about $85 billion each month through
the end of the year, should put downward pressure on longer-term interest rates, support
mortgage markets, and help to make broader financial conditions more accommodative.
4. The Committee will closely monitor incoming information on economic and financial
developments in coming months. If the outlook for the labor market does not improve
substantially, The Committee will continue its purchases of agency mortgage-backed
securities and Treasury securities, undertake additional asset purchases, and employ its
other policy tools as appropriate, until such improvement is achieved it judges that data
on economic activity and labor market conditions are consistent with an outlook for
sustained progress toward maximum employment in a context of price stability. In
determining the size, pace, and composition of its asset purchases, the Committee will, as
always, take appropriate account of the likely efficacy and costs of such purchases.
5. To support continued progress toward maximum employment and price stability, the
Committee expects that a highly accommodative stance of monetary policy will remain
appropriate for a considerable time after the economic recovery strengthens. In
particular, the Committee also decided today to keep the target range for the federal funds
rate at 0 to ¼ percent and currently anticipates that exceptionally low levels for the
federal funds rate are likely to be warranted at least through mid-2015.