JUNE FOMC STATEMENT—ALTERNATIVE B
1. Information received since the Federal Open Market Committee met in March April
suggests that the economy has been expanding moderately this year. Labor market
conditions have improved However, growth in employment has slowed in recent
months, and the unemployment rate has declined but remains elevated. Household
spending and Business fixed investment have has continued to advance.
Household spending appears to be rising at a somewhat slower pace than
earlier in the year. Despite some signs of improvement, the housing sector
remains depressed. Inflation has picked up somewhat declined, mainly reflecting
higher lower prices of crude oil and gasoline, However, and longer-term inflation
expectations have remained stable.
2. Consistent with its statutory mandate, the Committee seeks to foster maximum
employment and price stability. The Committee expects economic growth to
remain moderate over coming quarters and then to pick up very gradually.
s
Consequently, the Committee anticipates that the unemployment rate will decline e
v
gradually only slowly toward levels that it judges to be consistent with its dual t i
a
mandate. Furthermore, strains in global financial markets continue to pose n
r
e
significant downside risks to the economic outlook. The increase in oil and gasoline t
l
A
prices earlier this year is expected to affect inflation only temporarily, and The
Committee anticipates that subsequently inflation over the medium term will run
at or below the rate that it judges most consistent with its dual mandate.
3. To support a stronger economic recovery and to help ensure that inflation, over
time, is at the rate most consistent with its dual mandate, the Committee expects to
maintain a highly accommodative stance for monetary policy. In particular, the
Committee decided today to keep the target range for the federal funds rate at 0 to ¼
percent and currently anticipates that economic conditions—including low rates of
resource utilization and a subdued outlook for inflation over the medium run—are
likely to warrant exceptionally low levels for the federal funds rate at least through
late 2014.
4. The Committee also decided to continue through the end of the year its program
to extend the average maturity of its holdings of securities as announced in
September. Specifically, the Committee intends to purchase Treasury securities
with remaining maturities of 6 years to 30 years at the current pace and to sell
or redeem an equal amount of Treasury securities with remaining maturities of
approximately 3 years or less. This continuation of the maturity extension
program should put downward pressure on longer-term interest rates and help
to make broader financial conditions more accommodative. The Committee is
maintaining its existing policies policy of reinvesting principal payments from its
holdings of agency debt and agency mortgage-backed securities in agency
mortgage-backed securities and of rolling over maturing Treasury securities at
auction. The Committee will regularly review the size and composition of its
securities holdings and is prepared to adjust those holdings take further action as
appropriate to promote a stronger economic recovery and sustained improvement
in labor market conditions in a context of price stability.
 
 
 
5. [ The situation in Europe remains a source of stress in global financial markets.
The Committee will continue to closely monitor European developments and
their potential consequences for the economic recovery. The Federal Reserve
will deploy its tools as necessary to address the effects of global financial strains
on the U.S. financial system and economy. ]
s
e
v
i
t
a
n
r
e
t
l
A