AUGUST FOMC STATEMENT—ALTERNATIVE B
1. Information received since the Federal Open Market Committee met in April June
suggests that the economy has been expanding moderately economic activity
decelerated somewhat over the first half of this year. However, Growth in
employment has slowed been slow in recent months, and the unemployment rate
remains elevated. Business fixed investment has continued to advance. Household
spending appears to be rising at a somewhat slower pace than earlier in the year.
Despite some further signs of improvement, the housing sector remains depressed.
Inflation has declined since earlier this year, mainly reflecting lower prices of crude
oil and gasoline, and longer-term inflation expectations have remained stable.
2. Consistent with its statutory mandate, the Committee seeks to foster maximum
employment and price stability. The Committee expects economic growth to remain
be moderate over coming quarters and then to pick up very gradually. Consequently,
the Committee anticipates that the unemployment rate will decline only slowly
s
toward levels that it judges to be consistent with its dual mandate. Furthermore, e
v
strains in global financial markets [ continue to | and issues relating to U.S. fiscal t i
a
policy ] pose significant downside risks to the economic outlook. The Committee n
r
e
anticipates that inflation over the medium term will run at or below the rate that it t
l
A
judges most consistent with its dual mandate.
3. To support a stronger economic recovery and to help ensure that inflation, over time,
is at the rate most consistent with its dual mandate, the Committee expects to
maintain a highly accommodative stance for monetary policy. In particular, the
Committee decided today to keep the target range for the federal funds rate at 0 to ¼
percent and currently anticipates that economic conditions—including low rates of
resource utilization and a subdued outlook for inflation over the medium run—are
likely to warrant exceptionally low levels for the federal funds rate at least through
[ late 2014 | mid-2015 ].
4. The Committee also decided to continue through the end of the year its program to
extend the average maturity of its holdings of securities as announced in June,
Specifically, the Committee intends to purchase Treasury securities with remaining
maturities of 6 years to 30 years at the current pace and to sell or redeem an equal
amount of Treasury securities with remaining maturities of approximately 3 years or
less. This continuation of the maturity extension program should put downward
pressure on longer-term interest rates and help to make broader financial conditions
more accommodative. The Committee and it is maintaining its existing policy of
reinvesting principal payments from its holdings of agency debt and agency
mortgage-backed securities in agency mortgage-backed securities. The Committee is
prepared to take further action as appropriate will closely monitor incoming
information on economic and financial developments and will provide additional
accommodation as needed to promote a stronger economic recovery and sustained
improvement in labor market conditions in a context of price stability.