JUNE FOMC STATEMENT—ALTERNATIVE A
1. Information received since the Federal Open Market Committee met in March April
suggests that the economy has been expanding moderately this year. Labor market
conditions have improved However, growth in employment has slowed notably
in recent months, and the unemployment rate has declined but remains elevated.
Household spending and Business fixed investment have has continued to advance.
Household spending appears to be rising at a somewhat slower pace than
earlier in the year. Despite some signs of improvement, the housing sector
remains depressed. Inflation has picked up declined somewhat more than
anticipated, mainly reflecting higher lower prices of crude oil and gasoline,
However, while longer-term inflation expectations have remained stable.
2. Consistent with its statutory mandate, the Committee seeks to foster maximum
employment and price stability. The Committee expects economic growth to
remain moderate over coming quarters and then to pick up gradually.
s
Consequently, the Committee anticipates that the unemployment rate will decline e
v
gradually only slowly toward levels that it judges to be consistent with its dual t i
a
mandate. Furthermore, strains in global financial markets continue to pose n
r
e
significant downside risks to the economic outlook. The increase in oil and gasoline t
l
A
prices earlier this year is expected to affect inflation only temporarily, and The
Committee anticipates that subsequently inflation over the medium term will run
at or below the rate that it judges most consistent with its dual mandate.
3. The Committee expects to maintain a highly accommodative stance for monetary
policy. In particular, the Committee decided today to will keep the target range for
the federal funds rate at 0 to ¼ percent and currently anticipates that economic
conditions—including low rates of resource utilization and a subdued outlook for
inflation over the medium run—are likely to warrant maintaining exceptionally low
levels for the federal funds rate at least through [ late 2014 | mid-2015 ] in order to
support a stronger economic recovery and to help ensure that inflation, over time, is
at the rate most consistent with its dual mandate.
4. The Committee also decided to continue its purchase an additional [ $500 ] billion
of agency mortgage-backed securities by the end of June 2013. This program
should put downward pressure on longer-term interest rates, support mortgage
markets, and help to make broader financial conditions more accommodative.
The Committee will complete this month the program to extend the average
maturity of its holdings of securities as that it announced in September. The
Committee is maintaining its existing policies of reinvesting principal payments
from its holdings of agency debt and agency mortgage-backed securities in agency
mortgage-backed securities and of rolling over maturing Treasury securities at
auction. The Committee will regularly review the size and composition of its
securities holdings and is prepared to adjust those holdings take further action as
appropriate to promote a stronger economic recovery and more rapid
improvement in labor market conditions in a context of price stability.
OR
 
 
 
4′. The Committee also decided to continue its begin purchasing additional agency
mortgage-backed securities, initially at a rate of about [ $40 ] billion per
month. The Committee will regularly review the size and composition of its
securities holdings and is prepared to adjust those holdings as appropriate adjust
the pace of purchases and determine the ultimate size of the program as needed
to promote a stronger economic recovery and more rapid improvement in labor
market conditions in a context of price stability. This program should put
downward pressure on longer-term interest rates, support mortgage markets,
and help to make broader financial conditions more accommodative. The
Committee will complete this month the program to extend the average maturity
of its holdings of securities as that it announced in September. The Committee is
maintaining its existing policies of reinvesting principal payments from its holdings
of agency debt and agency mortgage-backed securities in agency mortgage-backed
securities and of rolling over maturing Treasury securities at auction.
5. [ The situation in Europe remains a source of stress in global financial markets.
e s The Committee will continue to closely monitor European developments and
v
i their potential consequences for the economic recovery. The Federal Reserve
t
a
n will deploy its tools as necessary to address the effects of global financial strains
r
e on the U.S. financial system and economy. ]
t
l
A