MARCH FOMC STATEMENT—ALTERNATIVE A
1. Information received since the Federal Open Market Committee met in December
January suggests that the economy has been expanding moderately,
notwithstanding some slowing in global growth. While indicators point to some
further improvement in overall labor market conditions have improved
somewhat further, the unemployment rate remains elevated. Household
spending and business fixed investment have continued to advance. but growth
in business fixed investment has slowed, and The housing sector remains
depressed. Inflation has been subdued in recent months, and although prices of
crude oil and gasoline have increased lately. Longer-term inflation
expectations have remained stable.
2. Consistent with its statutory mandate, the Committee seeks to foster maximum
employment and price stability. The Committee expects that, absent further
policy action, economic growth would slow over coming quarters to be modest
s
and consequently anticipates that the unemployment rate will would decline only e
v
gradually toward levels that the Committee judges to be consistent with its dual t i
a
mandate. Strains in global financial markets continue to pose significant n
r
e
downside risks to the economic outlook. The recent increase in oil and gasoline t
l
A
prices is likely to reduce consumers’ purchasing power while pushing up
inflation temporarily. Nonetheless, the Committee also anticipates that over
coming quarters, subsequently inflation will run at levels at or below those the
rate that it judges most consistent with the Committee's its dual mandate.
3. To support a stronger economic recovery and to help ensure that inflation, over
time, is at levels the rate most consistent with the its dual mandate, the
Committee expects to maintain a highly accommodative stance for monetary
policy. In particular, the Committee decided today to purchase an additional
$500 billion of agency mortgage-backed securities by the end of March 2013.
In addition, the Committee decided to continue its program to extend the
average maturity of its holdings of securities as announced in September. The
Committee also is maintaining its existing policies of reinvesting principal
payments from its holdings of agency debt and agency mortgage-backed
securities in agency mortgage-backed securities and of rolling over maturing
Treasury securities at auction. These programs should put downward pressure
on longer-term interest rates, provide support to mortgage markets, and help
make broader financial conditions more accommodative. The Committee will
regularly review the size and composition of its securities holdings and is
prepared to adjust those holdings as appropriate.
OR
 
 
 
3′. To support a stronger economic recovery and to help ensure that inflation, over
time, is at levels the rate most consistent with the its dual mandate, the
Committee expects to maintain a highly accommodative stance for monetary
policy. In particular, the Committee decided today to purchase additional
agency mortgage-backed securities, initially at a rate of $40 billion per
month. The Committee will adjust the pace of purchases and determine the
ultimate size of the program as needed to foster its objectives. In addition,
the Committee decided to continue its program to extend the average maturity of
its holdings of securities as announced in September. The Committee also is
maintaining its existing policies of reinvesting principal payments from its
holdings of agency debt and agency mortgage-backed securities in agency
mortgage-backed securities and of rolling over maturing Treasury securities at
auction. These programs should put downward pressure on longer-term
interest rates, provide support to mortgage markets, and help make broader
financial conditions more accommodative. The Committee will regularly
s review the size and composition of its securities holdings and is prepared to adjust
e
v those holdings as appropriate.
i
t
a
n 4. The Committee also decided to keep the target range for the federal funds rate at 0
r
e
t to ¼ percent and currently anticipates that economic conditions—including low
l
A
rates of resource utilization and a subdued outlook for inflation over the medium
run—are likely to warrant exceptionally low levels for the federal funds rate at
least through late 2014.
5. The Committee will employ its tools as needed to promote a stronger economic
recovery in a context of price stability.