OCTOBER FOMC STATEMENT—ALTERNATIVE C
1. Information received since the Federal Open Market Committee met in August
September suggests that economic activity has continued to expand at a moderate pace
in recent months despite the adverse effects of the drought on agricultural
production. Growth in Employment has increased further been slow, and the
unemployment rate, remains though still elevated, has declined. Household spending
Private domestic demand has continued to advance, but growth in business fixed
investment appears to have slowed. The housing sector has shown some further signs of
improvement, albeit from a depressed level. Inflation has been subdued, although the
prices of some key commodities have increased recently picked up, mainly reflecting
higher energy prices; however, longer-term inflation expectations have remained stable.
2. Consistent with its statutory mandate, the Committee seeks to foster maximum
employment and price stability. The Committee is concerned that, without further policy
accommodation, economic growth might not be strong enough to generate sustained
s improvement in labor market conditions expects economic growth to be moderate over
e
v coming quarters and then to pick up gradually, supported in part by the highly
i
t
a accommodative stance of monetary policy, and consequently anticipates that the
n
r unemployment rate will continue to decline toward levels that the Committee judges
e
t
l consistent with its dual mandate. Furthermore However, strains in global financial
A
markets continue to pose significant downside risks to the economic outlook. The
Committee also anticipates that inflation over the medium term likely would will run at
or below near its 2 percent objective.
3. To support a stronger economic recovery and to help ensure that inflation, over time, is at
the rate most consistent with its dual mandate, the Committee agreed today to increase
policy accommodation by continue purchasing additional agency mortgage-backed
securities at a pace of $40 billion per month through the end of the year. The
Committee also will continue through the end of the year its program to extend the
average maturity of its holdings of Treasury securities as announced in June, and it is
maintaining its existing policy of reinvesting principal payments from its holdings of
agency debt and agency mortgage-backed securities in agency mortgage-backed
securities. These actions, which together will increase the Committee’s holdings of
longer-term securities by about $85 billion each month through the end of the year,
should put downward pressure on longer-term interest rates, support mortgage markets,
and help to make broader financial conditions more accommodative.
4. The Committee will closely monitor incoming information on economic and financial
developments in coming months. If the outlook for the labor market does not improve
substantially, the Committee will continue its purchases of agency mortgage-backed
securities, undertake additional asset purchases, and employ its other policy tools as
appropriate until such improvement is achieved and is prepared to take further action
as needed to promote sustained improvement in labor market conditions in a context
of price stability. In determining the size, pace, and composition of its asset purchases,
the Committee will, as always, take appropriate account of the likely efficacy and costs of
such purchases.
5. To support continued progress toward maximum employment and price stability, the
Committee expects that a highly accommodative stance of monetary policy will remain
appropriate for [ a considerable | some ] time after the economic recovery strengthens. In
 
 
 
particular, the Committee also decided today to keep the target range for the federal funds
rate at 0 to ¼ percent and currently anticipates that exceptionally low levels for the
federal funds rate are likely to be warranted at least through mid-2015 [ late 2014 | mid-
2014 | late 2013 ].
OR
5'. To support continued progress toward maximum employment and in a context of price
stability, the Committee expects that a highly accommodative stance of monetary policy
will remain appropriate for [ a considerable | some ] time after the economic recovery
strengthens. In particular, the Committee also decided today to keep the target range for
the federal funds rate at 0 to ¼ percent and currently anticipates that exceptionally low
levels for the federal funds rate are likely to be warranted at least through mid-2015.
As rates of resource utilization rise toward levels consistent with maximum
employment, the Committee will need to make monetary policy less accommodative
in order to foster sustained economic expansion with inflation at its longer-run
objective. In determining the appropriate time to increase its target for the federal
funds rate, the Committee will consider a range of factors, including actual and s
e
projected labor market conditions, the medium-term outlook for inflation, and the v
i
t
risks to the achievement of the Committee’s objectives. a
n
r
e
t
l
A