SEPTEMBER FOMC STATEMENT—ALTERNATIVE C
1. Information received since the Federal Open Market Committee met in June August
suggests that economic activity decelerated somewhat over the first half of this year
has continued to expand at a moderate pace in recent months. Growth in
employment has been slow in recent months, and the unemployment rate remains
elevated picked up. Business fixed investment Private domestic demand has
continued to advance, Household spending has been rising at a somewhat slower pace
than earlier in the year. Despite some further signs of improvement, and the housing
sector remains depressed has shown some further signs of improvement. Inflation
has declined since earlier this year, mainly reflecting lower prices of crude oil and
gasoline, and longer-term inflation expectations have remained stable, but prices of
some key commodities recently have increased significantly.
2. Consistent with its statutory mandate, the Committee seeks to foster maximum
employment and price stability. The Committee expects economic growth to remain
s
e moderate over coming quarters and then to pick up very gradually. Consequently, the
v
t i Committee anticipates that the unemployment rate will decline only slowly toward
a
n
levels that it judges to be consistent with its dual mandate. Furthermore, strains in
r
e
t global financial markets continue to pose significant downside risks to the economic
l
A
outlook. The Committee anticipates that inflation over the medium term will run at
or below near the rate that it judges most consistent with its dual mandate
Committee’s 2 percent objective.
3. To support a stronger the economic recovery and to help ensure that inflation, over
time, is at the rate most consistent with its dual mandate, the Committee expects to
maintain a highly accommodative stance for monetary policy. In particular, the
Committee decided today to keep the target range for the federal funds rate at 0 to ¼
percent and currently anticipates that economic conditions—including low rates of
resource utilization and a subdued outlook for inflation over the medium run—are
likely to warrant exceptionally low levels for the federal funds rate at least through
late [ 2013 | 2014 ].
OR
3'. To support a stronger sustainable economic recovery and to help ensure that
inflation, over time, is at the rate most consistent with its dual mandate, the
Committee expects to maintain a highly accommodative stance for monetary policy.
In particular, the Committee decided today to keep the target range for the federal
funds rate at 0 to ¼ percent and currently anticipates that economic conditions—
including low rates of resource utilization and a subdued outlook for inflation over
the medium run—are likely to warrant exceptionally low levels for the federal funds
rate at least through late 2014. As rates of resource utilization rise toward levels
consistent with maximum employment, the Committee eventually will need to
make monetary policy less accommodative in order to ensure that the economy
expands at a sustainable pace and to prevent inflation from persistently
exceeding its longer-run objective. In determining the appropriate time to
increase its target for the federal funds rate, the Committee will consider a range
of factors, including actual and projected labor market conditions, the medium-
 
 
 
term outlook for inflation, and the risks to the achievement of the Committee’s
objectives.
4. The Committee also decided to continue through the end of the year its program to
extend the average maturity of its holdings of securities as announced in June, and it
is maintaining its existing policy of reinvesting principal payments from its holdings
of agency debt and agency mortgage-backed securities in agency mortgage-backed
securities. The Committee will closely monitor incoming information on economic
and financial developments and will provide additional accommodation as needed
regularly review the size and composition of its securities holdings and is
prepared to adjust those holdings as necessary to promote a stronger economic
recovery and sustained improvement in labor market conditions in a context of
maximum employment and price stability.
s
e
v
i
t
a
n
r
e
t
l
A