MARCH FOMC STATEMENT—ALTERNATIVE C
1. Information received since the Federal Open Market Committee met in December
January suggests that the economy has been expanding moderately, notwithstanding
some slowing in global growth. While indicators point to some further improvement
in overall labor market conditions, Although the unemployment rate remains
elevated, it has declined notably and the pace of employment growth has picked
up. Household spending and business fixed investment have continued to advance,
but growth in business fixed investment has slowed, and indicators of conditions in
the housing sector remains depressed have improved somewhat. Inflation has been
subdued in recent months, and longer-term inflation expectations have remained
stable. However, prices of crude oil and gasoline have increased significantly of
late.
2. Consistent with its statutory mandate, the Committee seeks to foster maximum
employment and price stability. The Committee expects a gradual increase in the
s pace of economic growth over coming quarters to be modest and consequently
e
v anticipates that the unemployment rate will continue to decline only gradually
i
t
a toward levels that the Committee judges to be consistent with its dual mandate.
n
e r Strains in global financial markets continue to pose significant downside risks to the
t
A l economic outlook. The Committee also anticipates that over coming quarters, the
recent increase in oil and gasoline prices is likely to push inflation will run at
levels at or below those above the rate that the Committee judges most consistent
with the Committee's its dual mandate. Moreover, the Committee sees some risk
that inflation could remain elevated going forward given the current degree of
policy accommodation.
3. To support a stronger the economic recovery and to help ensure that inflation, over
time, is at levels the rate most consistent with the its dual mandate, the Committee
expects to maintain a highly accommodative stance for monetary policy. The
Committee also decided today to continue its reduce from $400 billion to $250
billion the program to extend the average maturity of its holdings of securities as
that was announced in September and to complete this program by the end of
March. In particular, The Committee also decided today to keep the target range for
the federal funds rate at 0 to ¼ percent and currently anticipates that economic
conditions—including low rates of resource utilization and a subdued outlook for
inflation over the medium run—are likely to warrant this exceptionally low levels
range for the federal funds rate at least through late 2014 will be appropriate only
as long as inflation is projected to remain subdued over the medium term,
longer-term inflation expectations continue to be well anchored, and progress
toward maximum employment remains insufficient.
4. The Committee is also maintaining its existing policies of reinvesting principal
payments from its holdings of agency debt and agency mortgage-backed securities in
agency mortgage-backed securities and of rolling over maturing Treasury securities at
auction. The Committee will regularly review the size and composition of its
securities holdings and is prepared to adjust those holdings as appropriate to promote
a stronger economic recovery in a context of its objectives of maximum
employment and price stability.