SEPTEMBER FOMC STATEMENT—ALTERNATIVE B
1. Information received since the Federal Open Market Committee met in June August
suggests that economic activity decelerated somewhat over the first half of this year
has continued to expand at a moderate pace in recent months. Growth in
Although employment has been slow in recent months increased somewhat, and the
unemployment rate remains elevated. Household spending has been rising at a
somewhat slower pace than earlier in the year continued to advance, but growth in
business fixed investment has continued to advance appears to have slowed.
Despite some further signs of improvement, The housing sector remains has shown
some further signs of improvement, albeit from a depressed level. Inflation has
declined since earlier this year, mainly reflecting lower prices of crude oil and
gasoline been subdued, although the prices of some key commodities have
increased recently. and Longer-term inflation expectations have remained stable.
2. Consistent with its statutory mandate, the Committee seeks to foster maximum
s
e employment and price stability. The Committee expects that, without further
v
t i policy accommodation, economic growth to remain moderate over coming quarters
a
n
and then to pick up very gradually likely would not be strong enough to generate
r
e
t sustained improvement in labor market conditions. Consequently, the Committee
l
A
anticipates that the unemployment rate will decline only slowly toward levels that it
judges to be consistent with its dual mandate. Furthermore, strains in global financial
markets continue to pose significant downside risks to the economic outlook. The
Committee also anticipates that inflation over the medium term will likely would run
at or below the rate that it judges most consistent with its dual mandate its 2 percent
objective.
3. To support a stronger economic recovery and to help ensure that inflation, over time,
is at the rate most consistent with its dual mandate, the Committee expects to
maintain a highly accommodative stance for monetary policy decided today to begin
a new asset-purchase program. Specifically, the Committee now intends to
increase its holdings of longer-term Treasury securities at a pace of about [ $45 ]
billion per month and increase its holdings of agency mortgage-backed securities
at a pace of about [ $30 ] billion per month. This new asset-purchase program
replaces the previously announced maturity extension program. In particular,
the Committee is ending its sales of shorter-term Treasury securities and
reinstituting its policy of rolling over maturing Treasury securities at auction.
The Committee also decided to continue through the end of the year its program to
extend the average maturity of its holdings of securities as announced in June, and it
is maintaining its existing policy of reinvesting principal payments from its holdings
of agency debt and agency mortgage-backed securities in agency mortgage-backed
securities. The Committee will closely monitor incoming information on economic
and financial developments and will provide additional accommodation as needed to
promote a stronger economic recovery and sustained improvement in labor market
conditions in a context of price stability.
 
 
 
4. The Committee will continue this new asset-purchase program until it has
observed substantial ongoing improvement in labor market conditions, provided
that the Committee projects that inflation over the medium term will be close to
its 2 percent objective and longer-term inflation expectations remain stable.
Given its current assessment of the economic outlook, the Committee anticipates
that this program will continue at least through mid-2013. These increases in its
securities holdings should put downward pressure on longer-term interest rates,
support mortgage markets, and help to make broader financial conditions more
accommodative. The Committee will regularly review the pace and composition
of its securities purchases in light of actual and projected progress toward its
objectives and its ongoing assessments of the efficacy and costs of the purchases.
5. To support continued progress toward maximum employment and price
stability, the Committee expects that a highly accommodative stance of
monetary policy will remain appropriate for a considerable time after the
conclusion of this asset-purchase program. In particular, the Committee also
decided today to keep the target range for the federal funds rate at 0 to ¼ percent and, e s
v
currently anticipates that economic conditions—including low rates of resource i
t
a
utilization and a subdued outlook for inflation over the medium run—are likely to n
r
warrant exceptionally low levels for the federal funds rate are likely to be warranted e
t
l
at least through late 2014 mid-2015. A