JANUARY FOMC STATEMENT—ALTERNATIVE C
1. Information received since the Federal Open Market Committee met in November
December suggests that the economic has been expanding moderately, notwithstanding
some apparent slowing in global growth recovery has strengthened somewhat. While
indicators point to some improvement in overall labor market conditions, Although the
unemployment rate remains elevated, it has declined recently, and employment
continues to increase. Household spending has continued to advanced further, but and
business fixed investment appears to be increasing less rapidly and has continued to
expand, but the housing sector remains depressed. Inflation has moderated since earlier
in the somewhat since the first half of last year, and longer-term inflation expectations
have remained stable.
2. Consistent with its statutory mandate, the Committee seeks to foster maximum
employment and price stability. The Committee continues to expects a moderate firming
in the pace of economic growth over coming quarters and consequently anticipates that s
e
v
the unemployment rate will decline only gradually toward levels that the Committee i
t
a
judges to be consistent with its dual mandate. Strains in global financial markets n
r
continue to pose significant downside risks to the economic outlook. The Committee e
t
l
also anticipates that over coming quarters, inflation will settle, run at levels at or below A
those consistent with the Committee's dual mandate. However, The Committee will
continue to pay close attention to the evolution of inflation and inflation expectations.
3. To support a stronger the economic recovery and to help while ensuring that inflation,
over time, is at levels that are consistent with the dual mandate, the Committee decided
today to continue its reduce by half the size of the program to extend the average
maturity of its holdings of securities as announced in September and to complete the
program by the end of February. The Committee is maintaining its existing policies of
reinvesting principal payments from its holdings of agency debt and agency mortgage-
backed securities in agency mortgage-backed securities and of rolling over maturing
Treasury securities at auction. The Committee will regularly review the size and
composition of its securities holdings and is prepared to adjust those holdings as
appropriate.
4. The Committee also decided to keep the target range for the federal funds rate at 0 to ¼
percent and currently now anticipates that economic conditions—including low rates of
resource utilization and a subdued outlook for inflation over the medium run—are likely
to warrant exceptionally low levels for the federal funds rate at least through mid-2013
for an extended period.
5. The Committee will continue to assess the economic outlook in light of incoming
information and is prepared to employ its tools as appropriate to promote a stronger
economic recovery in a context of its objectives of maximum employment and price
stability.