AUGUST FOMC STATEMENT—ALTERNATIVE A
1. Information received since the Federal Open Market Committee met in April June
suggests that the economy has been expanding moderately economic activity
decelerated somewhat over the first half of this year. However, Growth in
employment has slowed been slow in recent months, and the unemployment rate
remains elevated. Business fixed investment has continued to advance. Household
spending appears to be rising at a somewhat slower pace than earlier in the year.
Despite some signs of improvement, the housing sector remains depressed. Inflation
has declined been subdued in recent months, mainly reflecting lower prices of
crude oil and gasoline, and longer-term inflation expectations have remained stable.
2. Consistent with its statutory mandate, the Committee seeks to foster maximum
employment and price stability. The Committee expects economic growth to remain
be moderate over coming quarters and then to pick up very gradually. Consequently,
the Committee anticipates that the unemployment rate will decline only slowly
s
toward levels that it judges to be consistent with its dual mandate. Furthermore, e
v
strains in global financial markets [ continue to | and issues relating to U.S. fiscal t i
a
policy ] pose significant downside risks to the economic outlook. The Committee n
r
e
anticipates that inflation over the medium term will run at or below the rate that it t
l
A
judges most consistent with its dual mandate.
3. To support a stronger economic recovery and to help ensure that inflation, over time,
is at the rate most consistent with its dual mandate, the Committee also decided to
continue through the end of the year its program to extend the average maturity of its
holdings of securities begin a new large-scale asset purchase program.
Specifically, the Committee now intends to purchase Treasury securities with
remaining maturities of 6 years to 30 years at the current pace and to sell or redeem
an equal amount of Treasury securities with remaining maturities of approximately 3
years or less increase its holdings of longer-term Treasury securities at a pace of
about [ $45 ] billion per month and of agency mortgage-backed securities at a
pace of about [ $30 ] billion per month. The Committee anticipates continuing to
add to its holdings at least until it observes sustained improvement in labor
market conditions, as long as projected medium-term inflation is close to its
mandate-consistent level and longer-term inflation expectations remain stable.
This continuation of the maturity extension program The increase in the
Committee’s securities holdings should put downward pressure on longer-term
interest rates, support mortgage markets, and help to make broader financial
conditions more accommodative. This new purchase program replaces the
previously announced maturity extension program; therefore, the Committee is
ending its sales of shorter-term Treasury securities and reinstituting its policy of
rolling over maturing Treasury securities at auction. The Committee is
maintaining its existing policy of reinvesting principal payments from its holdings of
agency debt and agency mortgage-backed securities in agency mortgage-backed
securities. The Committee will regularly review the pace and composition of its
securities purchases in light of the economic outlook and its ongoing assessments
of the efficacy and costs of the program, and is prepared to take further action
 
 
 
make adjustments as appropriate to promote a stronger economic recovery and
sustained improvement in labor market conditions in a context of price stability.
OR
3'. To support a stronger economic recovery and to help ensure that inflation, over time,
is at the rate most consistent with its dual mandate, the Committee also decided to
continue through the end of the year its program to extend the average maturity of its
holdings of securities begin a new large-scale asset purchase program.
Specifically, the Committee now intends to purchase Treasury securities with
remaining maturities of 6 years to 30 years at the current pace and to sell or redeem
an equal amount of Treasury securities with remaining maturities of approximately 3
years or less [ $600 billion ] of longer-term Treasury securities and [ $400 billion ]
of agency mortgage-backed securities by the end of the third quarter of 2013, a
combined pace of about [ $75 ] billion a month. This continuation of the maturity
extension program This action should put downward pressure on longer-term
interest rates, support mortgage markets, and help to make broader financial
s
e
v conditions more accommodative. This new purchase program replaces the
i
a t previously announced maturity extension program; therefore, the Committee is
n
r ending its sales of shorter-term Treasury securities and reinstituting its policy of
e
t
l rolling over maturing Treasury securities at auction. The Committee is
A
maintaining its existing policy of reinvesting principal payments from its holdings of
agency debt and agency mortgage-backed securities in agency mortgage-backed
securities. The Committee will regularly review the size and composition of its
balance sheet in light of the outlook for inflation and labor market conditions
and is prepared to take further action make adjustments as appropriate to promote a
stronger economic recovery and sustained improvement in labor market conditions in
a context of price stability.
4. The Committee also decided today to keep the target range for the federal funds rate
at 0 to ¼ percent and. To support sustained improvement in labor market
conditions and to help ensure that inflation is close to its mandate-consistent
level over the medium run, the Committee expects to maintain a highly
accommodative stance for monetary policy as the economic recovery strengthens.
In particular, the Committee currently anticipates that economic conditions—
including low rates of resource utilization and a subdued outlook for inflation over
the medium run—are likely to warrant exceptionally low levels for the federal funds
rate are likely to be warranted at least through late 2014 mid-2015.
Note: If policymakers decide that it is appropriate to reduce the remuneration rate on
reserve balances, the Board of Governors would issue an accompanying statement that
might read:
In a related action, the Board of Governors voted today to reduce the interest rate paid
on required and excess reserve balances from 25 basis points to 15 basis points
effective with the reserve maintenance period that begins on August 9, 2012.