DECEMBER FOMC STATEMENT—ALTERNATIVE B
1. Information received since the Federal Open Market Committee met in September
October suggests that economic activity has continued to expand at a moderate pace
in recent months, apart from weather-related disruptions. Growth in employment
has been slow picked up a bit, and but the unemployment rate remains elevated.
Household spending has continued to advanced a bit more quickly, and the housing
sector has shown further signs of improvement, but growth in business fixed
investment has slowed. The housing sector has shown some further signs of
improvement, albeit from a depressed level. Inflation recently picked up somewhat,
has been running somewhat below the Committee’s longer-run objective, apart
from temporary variations that largely reflecting higher fluctuations in energy
prices. Longer-term inflation expectations have remained stable.
2. Consistent with its statutory mandate, the Committee seeks to foster maximum
employment and price stability. The Committee remains concerned that, without
s
sufficient policy accommodation, economic growth might not be strong enough to e
v
i
generate sustained improvement in labor market conditions. Furthermore, strains in t
a
n
global financial markets continue to pose significant downside risks to the economic r
e
outlook. The Committee also anticipates that inflation over the medium term likely t
l
A
would will run at or below its 2 percent objective.
3. To support a stronger economic recovery and to help ensure that inflation, over time,
is at the rate most consistent with its dual mandate, the Committee will continue
purchasing additional agency mortgage-backed securities at a pace of $40 billion per
month. The Committee also will continue through the end of the year purchase
longer-term Treasury securities after its program to extend the average maturity of
its holdings of Treasury securities, and it is completed at the end of the year,
initially at a pace of $45 billion per month. The Committee is maintaining its
existing policy of reinvesting principal payments from its holdings of agency debt and
agency mortgage-backed securities in agency mortgage-backed securities and, in
January, will resume rolling over maturing Treasury securities at auction.
Taken together, these actions, which together will increase the Committee’s
holdings of longer-term securities by about $85 billion each month through the end of
the year, should put downward pressure on longer-term interest rates, support
mortgage markets, and help to make broader financial conditions more
accommodative.
4. The Committee will closely monitor incoming information on economic and financial
developments in coming months. If the outlook for the labor market does not
improve substantially, the Committee will continue its purchases of Treasury and
agency mortgage-backed securities, undertake additional asset purchases, and employ
its other policy tools as appropriate, until such improvement is achieved in a context
of price stability. In determining the size, pace, and composition of its asset
purchases, the Committee will, as always, take appropriate account of the likely
efficacy and costs of such purchases.
 
 
 
5. To support continued progress toward maximum employment and price stability, the
Committee expects that a highly accommodative stance of monetary policy will
remain appropriate for a considerable time after [ it sees a substantial improvement
in the outlook for the labor market, the asset purchase program ends, and ] the
economic recovery strengthens. In particular, the Committee also decided today to
keep the target range for the federal funds rate at 0 to ¼ percent and currently
anticipates that exceptionally low levels for the federal funds rate are likely to be
warranted at least through mid-2015 this exceptionally low range for the federal
funds rate will be appropriate at least as long as the unemployment rate remains
above 6½ percent, inflation between one and two years ahead is projected to be
no more than ½ percentage point above the Committee’s 2 percent longer-run
goal, and longer-term inflation expectations continue to be well anchored. The
Committee views these thresholds as consistent with its earlier date-based
guidance. In determining how long to maintain a highly accommodative stance
of monetary policy, the Committee will also consider other information,
s including additional measures of labor market conditions, indicators of inflation
e
v pressures and inflation expectations, and readings on financial developments.
i
t
a When the Committee decides to begin to remove policy accommodation, it will
n
r
e take a balanced approach consistent with [ maintaining satisfactory progress
t
l
A toward maximum employment in a context of price stability | its longer-run
goals of maximum employment and inflation of 2 percent ].
OR
5'. To support continued progress toward maximum employment and price stability, the
Committee expects that a highly accommodative stance of monetary policy will
remain appropriate for a considerable time after [ it sees a substantial improvement
in the outlook for the labor market, the asset purchase program ends, and ] the
economic recovery strengthens. In particular, the Committee also decided today to
keep the target range for the federal funds rate at 0 to ¼ percent and currently
anticipates that exceptionally low levels for the federal funds rate are likely to be
warranted at least through mid-2015.