DECEMBER FOMC STATEMENT—ALTERNATIVE C
1. Information received since the Federal Open Market Committee met in September
October suggests that economic activity has continued to expand at a moderate pace
in recent months, apart from weather-related disruptions. Growth in employment
has been slow strengthened somewhat, and the unemployment rate, remains though
still elevated, has declined. Household spending has advanced a bit more quickly,
but growth in business fixed investment has slowed. Private domestic demand has
continued to advance, and the housing sector has shown some further signs of
improvement, albeit from a depressed level. Inflation recently picked up somewhat,
reflecting higher energy prices has been running close to the Committee’s longer-
run objective. Longer-term inflation expectations have remained stable.
2. Consistent with its statutory mandate, the Committee seeks to foster maximum
employment and price stability. The Committee remains concerned that, without
sufficient policy accommodation, economic growth might not be strong enough to
s
generate sustained improvement in labor market conditions expects economic e
v
i
growth to be moderate over coming quarters and then to pick up gradually, t
a
n
supported in part by the highly accommodative stance of monetary policy, and r
e
consequently anticipates that the unemployment rate will continue to decline at a l t
A
pace that the Committee judges consistent with its mandate. Furthermore
However, strains in global financial markets continue to pose significant downside
risks to the economic outlook. The Committee also anticipates that inflation over the
medium term likely would will run at or below near its 2 percent objective.
3. In light of the improving economic outlook, the Committee judges that it has
provided sufficient policy accommodation to support a stronger economic recovery
and to help ensure that inflation, over time, is at the rate most consistent with its dual
mandate. Accordingly, the Committee will, at the end of the year, discontinue
purchasing additional agency mortgage-backed securities at a pace of $40 billion per
month. and complete The Committee also will continue through the end of the year
its program to extend the average maturity of its holdings of Treasury securities. and
it The Committee is maintaining continuing its existing policy of reinvesting
principal payments from its holdings of agency debt and agency mortgage-backed
securities in agency mortgage-backed securities and, in January, will resume
rolling over maturing Treasury securities at auction. These actions, which
together will increase keep the Committee’s holdings of longer-term securities by
about $85 billion each month through the end of the year, at a level of about $2.8
trillion, will maintain a highly accommodative stance of monetary policy and
should put sustain downward pressure on longer-term interest rates, support
mortgage markets, and help to make keep broader financial conditions more
accommodative.
 
 
 
4. The Committee will closely monitor incoming information on economic and financial
developments in coming months. If the outlook for the labor market does not
improve substantially, the Committee will continue its purchases of agency mortgage-
backed securities, undertake additional asset purchases, and employ its other policy
tools as appropriate until such improvement is achieved and is prepared to take
further action as needed to promote sustained improvement in labor market
conditions in a context of price stability. In determining the size, pace, and
composition of its asset purchases, the Committee will, as always, take appropriate
account of the likely efficacy and costs of such purchases.
5. To support continued progress toward maximum employment and price stability, the
Committee expects that a highly accommodative stance of monetary policy will
remain appropriate for [ a considerable | some ] time after the economic recovery
strengthens. In particular, the Committee also decided today to keep the target range
for the federal funds rate at 0 to ¼ percent and currently anticipates that exceptionally
low levels for the federal funds rate are likely to be warranted at least through mid-
s
e 2015 this exceptionally low range for the federal funds rate will be appropriate
v
t i until it has observed substantial improvement in labor market conditions,
a
n provided that the Committee projects that inflation over the medium term will
r
e
t be close to its [ 2 percent ] objective and longer-term inflation expectations
l
A
remain stable.
OR
5'. To support continued progress toward maximum employment and price stability, the
Committee expects that a highly accommodative stance of monetary policy will
remain appropriate for [ a considerable | some ] time after the economic recovery
strengthens. In particular, the Committee also decided today to keep the target range
for the federal funds rate at 0 to ¼ percent and currently anticipates that exceptionally
low levels for the federal funds rate are likely to be warranted at least through mid-
2015 [ late 2014 | mid-2014 | late 2013 ].