JANUARY FOMC STATEMENT—ALTERNATIVE C
1. Information received since the Federal Open Market Committee met in October
December suggests indicates that growth in economic activity and employment
have continued to expand at a moderate pace slowed in recent months, apart from
because of weather-related disruptions and other transitory factors. Although the
unemployment rate remains elevated, it has declined somewhat since the summer, it
remains elevated substantially during the past year. Household spending has
continued to and business fixed investment advanced, and the housing sector has
shown further signs of improvement, but growth in business fixed investment has
slowed. Inflation has been running somewhat below the Committee’s longer-run
objective, apart from temporary variations that largely reflect fluctuations in energy
prices. Longer-term inflation expectations have remained stable.
2. Consistent with its statutory mandate, the Committee seeks to foster maximum
e s employment and price stability. The Committee remains concerned that, without
v
i sufficient policy accommodation, economic growth might not be strong enough to
t
a
n generate sustained improvement in labor market conditions. The Committee expects
r
e that economic growth will return to a moderate pace and that the unemployment
t
l
A rate will decline toward levels the Committee judges consistent with its dual
mandate. Furthermore, strains in global financial markets continue to pose
significant and the associated downside risks to the economic outlook appear to
have diminished. The Committee also anticipates that inflation over the medium
term likely will run at or below close to its 2 percent objective.
3. In light of the outlook for labor markets and inflation, and its current
assessment of the likely efficacy and costs of further asset purchases, the
Committee decided to reduce the pace of its asset purchases. In particular, To
support a stronger economic recovery and to help ensure that inflation, over time, is at
the rate most consistent with its dual mandate, the Committee will continue
purchasing purchase additional agency mortgage-backed securities at a pace of $40
$20 billion per month and The Committee also will purchase longer-term Treasury
securities after its program to extend the average maturity of its holdings of Treasury
securities is completed at the end of the year, initially at a pace of $45 $25 billion per
month. The Committee is maintaining its existing policy of will continue to
reinvesting principal payments from its holdings of agency debt and agency
mortgage-backed securities in agency mortgage-backed securities and, in January,
will resume to rolling over maturing Treasury securities at auction. Taken together,
these actions will increase the Committee’s holdings of longer-term securities and
should maintain downward pressure on longer-term interest rates, support mortgage
markets, and help to make keep broader financial conditions more accommodative.
 
 
 
4. The Committee will closely monitor incoming information on economic and financial
developments in coming months. If the economy develops as anticipated, the
Committee expects to further reduce the pace of its asset purchases in coming
months and to bring them to an end by midyear. However, if the outlook for the
labor market does not improve substantially as expected or if inflation is projected
to be appreciably below 2 percent, the Committee will continue is prepared to
maintain or increase the pace of its purchases of Treasury and agency mortgage-
backed longer-term securities, and employ its other policy tools as appropriate, until
such improvement is achieved in a context of price stability. In determining the size,
pace, and composition of its asset purchases, the Committee will, as always, take
appropriate account of the likely efficacy and costs of such purchases.
5. To support continued progress toward maximum employment and price stability, the
Committee expects that a highly accommodative stance of monetary policy will
remain appropriate for a considerable time after the asset purchase program ends and
the economic recovery strengthens. In particular, the Committee decided to keep the s
e
target range for the federal funds rate at 0 to ¼ percent and currently anticipates that v
i
t
this exceptionally low range for the federal funds rate will be appropriate at least as a
n
r
long as the unemployment rate remains above 6½ percent, inflation between one and e
t
two years ahead is projected to be no more than a half percentage point above the A l
Committee’s 2 percent longer-run goal, and longer-term inflation expectations
continue to be well anchored. The Committee views these thresholds as consistent
with its earlier date-based guidance. In determining how long to maintain a highly
accommodative stance of monetary policy, the Committee will also consider other
information, including additional measures of labor market conditions, indicators of
inflation pressures and inflation expectations, and readings on financial
developments. When the Committee decides to begin to remove policy
accommodation, it will take a balanced approach consistent with its longer-run goals
of maximum employment and inflation of 2 percent.