FOMC STATEMENT—SEPTEMBER 2013 ALTERNATIVE C
1. Information received since the Federal Open Market Committee met in June July
suggests that economic activity expanded is expanding at a modest moderate pace
during the first half of the year. Labor market conditions have shown further
improvement in recent months, on balance, with continuing gains in payroll
employment, but although the unemployment rate remains elevated. Household
spending and business fixed investment advanced, and the housing sector has been
strengthening, but continued to strengthen, even though mortgage rates have risen
somewhat further and fiscal policy is restraining economic growth. Partly reflecting
transitory influences Apart from fluctuations due to changes in energy prices,
inflation has been running somewhat below the Committee’s longer-run objective, but
longer-term inflation expectations have remained stable.
2. Consistent with its statutory mandate, the Committee seeks to foster maximum
employment and price stability. The Committee expects that, with appropriate policy
accommodation, economic growth will pick up from its recent pace and the
unemployment rate will gradually decline toward levels the Committee judges consistent
with its dual mandate. The Committee sees the downside risks to the outlook for the
economy and the labor market as having diminished since the last fall [ and has become
more confident that labor market conditions will continue to improve over the
medium term ]. The Committee recognizes that inflation persistently below its 2 percent
objective could pose risks to economic performance, but it also anticipates that inflation
will move back toward its 2 percent objective over the medium term.
3. To support a stronger economic recovery and to help ensure that inflation, over time, is at
the rate most consistent with its dual mandate, the Committee decided to continue
purchasing additional agency mortgage-backed securities at a pace of $40 billion per
month and longer-term Treasury securities at a pace of $45 billion per month. In light of
the improvement in the labor market since the Committee began its current asset
purchase program a year ago, the Committee decided today to make modest
downward adjustments in its asset purchases, to a monthly pace of [ $35 ] billion
from $40 billion for its purchases of additional agency mortgage-backed securities,
and to a monthly pace of [ $40 ] billion from $45 billion for longer-term Treasury
securities. The Committee is maintaining its existing policy of reinvesting principal
payments from its holdings of agency debt and agency mortgage-backed securities in
agency mortgage-backed securities and of rolling over maturing Treasury securities at
auction. Taken together, these actions The Committee’s sizable and still-increasing
holdings of longer-term securities should maintain downward pressure on longer-term
interest rates, support mortgage markets, and help to make broader financial conditions
more accommodative, which in turn should promote a stronger economic recovery
and help to ensure that inflation, over time, is at the rate most consistent with the
Committee’s dual mandate.
4. The Committee will closely monitor incoming information on economic and financial
developments in coming months and The Committee will continue its purchases of
Treasury and agency mortgage-backed securities, and employ its other policy tools as
appropriate, until the outlook for the labor market has improved substantially in a context
of price stability. If the Committee sees continued improvement in labor market
conditions and inflation moving back toward its longer-run objective, then
additional measured reductions in the pace of asset purchases likely would become
 
 
 
 
appropriate. However, asset purchases are not on a preset course, and the
Committee’s decisions about their pace will remain contingent on the Committee’s
economic outlook as well as its assessment of the likely efficacy and costs of such
purchases. The Committee is prepared to increase or reduce the pace of its purchases to
maintain appropriate policy accommodation as the outlook for the labor market or
inflation changes. In determining the size, pace, and composition of its asset purchases,
the Committee will continue to take appropriate account of the likely efficacy and costs
of such purchases as well as the extent of progress toward its economic objectives.
OR
4'. The Committee will closely monitor incoming information on economic and financial
developments in coming months. If the Committee sees sufficient further progress
toward its objectives for the labor market and inflation, as it expects, then
additional measured reductions in the pace of asset purchases would become
appropriate. The Committee will continue its purchases of Treasury and agency
mortgage-backed securities, and employ its other policy tools as appropriate, until the
outlook for the labor market has improved substantially in a context of price stability. In
particular, the Committee anticipates that by the time its asset purchases end, the
unemployment rate will be around 7 percent and expected to decline further, and
inflation will be moving back toward its 2 percent longer-run goal. The Committee is
prepared to increase or reduce the pace of its purchases to maintain appropriate policy
accommodation as the outlook for the labor market or inflation changes. In determining
the size, pace, and composition of its asset purchases, the Committee will continue to
take appropriate account of the likely efficacy and costs of such purchases as well as the
extent of progress toward its economic objectives. However, asset purchases are not
on a preset course, and the Committee’s decisions about their pace will remain
contingent on its economic outlook as well as its assessment of the likely efficacy and
costs of such purchases.
5. To support continued progress toward maximum employment and price stability, the
Committee today reaffirmed its view that a highly accommodative stance of monetary
policy will remain appropriate for a considerable time after the asset purchase program
ends and the economic recovery strengthens. In particular, the Committee decided to
keep the target range for the federal funds rate at 0 to ¼ percent and currently anticipates
that this exceptionally low range for the federal funds rate will be appropriate at least as
long as the unemployment rate remains above 6½ percent, inflation between one and two
years ahead is projected to be no more than a half percentage point above the
Committee’s 2 percent longer-run goal, and longer-term inflation expectations continue
to be well anchored. In determining how long to maintain a highly accommodative
stance of monetary policy, the Committee will also consider other information, including
additional measures of labor market conditions, indicators of inflation pressures and
inflation expectations, and readings on financial developments. When the Committee
decides to begin to remove policy accommodation, it will take a balanced approach
consistent with its longer-run goals of maximum employment and inflation of 2 percent.