FOMC STATEMENT—DECEMBER 2013 ALTERNATIVE B
1. Information received since the Federal Open Market Committee met in September
October generally suggests indicates that economic activity has continued to is
expanding at a moderate pace. Indicators of Labor market conditions have shown
some further improvement; but the unemployment rate has declined but remains
elevated. Available data suggest that Household spending and business fixed
investment advanced, while the recovery in the housing sector slowed somewhat in
recent months. Fiscal policy is restraining economic growth, although the extent of
restraint may be diminishing. Apart from fluctuations due to changes in energy
prices, Inflation has been running below the Committee's longer-run objective, but
longer-term inflation expectations have remained stable.
2. Consistent with its statutory mandate, the Committee seeks to foster maximum
employment and price stability. The Committee expects that, with appropriate policy
accommodation, economic growth will pick up from its recent pace and the
unemployment rate will gradually decline toward levels the Committee judges
consistent with its dual mandate. The Committee sees the [ downside risks to the
outlook for the economy and the labor market as having diminished, on net, since last
fall the inception of the asset purchase program | risks to the outlook for the
economy and the labor market as roughly balanced ]. The Committee recognizes
that inflation persistently below its 2 percent objective could pose risks to economic
performance, but it. The Committee anticipates that inflation will move back toward
its objective over the medium term, but it will monitor inflation developments
carefully.
3. Taking into account the extent of federal fiscal retrenchment over the past year since
the inception of its current asset purchase program, the Committee sees the
improvement in economic activity and labor market conditions since it began its asset
purchase program over that period as consistent with growing underlying strength in
the broader economy. However, the Committee decided to await more evidence that
progress will be sustained before adjusting the pace of its purchases. Accordingly,
the Committee decided to continue purchasing additional agency mortgage-backed
securities at a pace of $40 billion per month and longer-term Treasury securities at a
pace of $45 billion per month. In light of the cumulative progress toward
maximum employment and the improvement in the outlook for labor market
conditions, the Committee decided to modestly reduce the pace of its asset
purchases. Beginning in January, the Committee will add to its holdings of
agency mortgage-backed securities at a pace of $35 billion per month rather
than $40 billion per month, and will add to its holdings of longer-term Treasury
securities at a pace of $40 billion per month rather than $45 billion per month.
The Committee is maintaining its existing policy of reinvesting principal payments
from its holdings of agency debt and agency mortgage-backed securities in agency
mortgage-backed securities and of rolling over maturing Treasury securities at
auction. Taken together, these actions The Committee’s sizable and still-
increasing holdings of longer-term securities should maintain downward pressure
on longer-term interest rates, support mortgage markets, and help to make broader
financial conditions more accommodative, which in turn should promote a stronger
 
 
 
 
economic recovery and help to ensure that inflation, over time, is at the rate most
consistent with the Committee’s dual mandate.
4. The Committee will closely monitor incoming information on economic and financial
developments in coming months and will continue its purchases of Treasury and
agency mortgage-backed securities, and employ its other policy tools as appropriate,
until the outlook for the labor market has improved substantially in a context of price
stability. In judging when to moderate the pace of asset purchases, the Committee
will, at its coming meetings, assess whether If incoming information continues to
broadly supports the Committee’s expectation of ongoing improvement in labor
market conditions and inflation moving back toward its longer-run objective, the
Committee will likely reduce the pace of asset purchases in further measured
steps at future meetings. However, asset purchases are not on a preset course, and
the Committee’s decisions about their pace will remain contingent on the
Committee’s economic outlook as well as its assessment of the likely efficacy and
costs of such purchases.
5. To support continued progress toward maximum employment and price stability, the
Committee today reaffirmed its view that a highly accommodative stance of monetary
policy will remain appropriate for a considerable time after the asset purchase
program ends and the economic recovery strengthens. In particular, The Committee
decided to keep the target range for the federal funds rate at 0 to ¼ percent and
currently anticipates that this previously has stated its expectation that the current
exceptionally low range for the federal funds rate of 0 to ¼ percent will be
appropriate at least as long as the unemployment rate remains above 6½ percent,
inflation between one and two years ahead is projected to be no more than a half
percentage point above the Committee’s 2 percent longer-run goal, and longer-term
inflation expectations continue to be well anchored. The Committee also has stated
that, in determining how long to maintain a highly accommodative stance of
monetary policy, the Committee it will also consider other information, including
additional measures of labor market conditions, indicators of inflation pressures and
inflation expectations, and readings on financial developments. Based on its
assessment of current economic conditions and the outlook, the Committee now
anticipates that it likely will be appropriate to maintain the current target range
for the federal funds rate well past the time that the unemployment rate declines
below 6½ percent, especially if projected inflation continues to run below the
Committee’s 2 percent longer-run goal. When the Committee decides to begin to
remove policy accommodation, it will take a balanced approach consistent with its
longer-run goals of maximum employment and inflation of 2 percent.