FOMC STATEMENT—JULY 2013 ALTERNATIVE C
1. Information received since the Federal Open Market Committee met in May June
suggests indicates that economic activity has been expanding at a moderate pace.
Labor market conditions have shown further improvement in recent months, on
balance, with [ appreciable | solid ] gains in payroll employment, but although the
unemployment rate remains elevated has not declined in recent months. Household
spending and business fixed investment advanced, and the housing sector has
strengthened further, but even though fiscal policy is restraining economic growth.
Partly reflecting transitory influences, inflation has been running below the
Committee’s longer-run objective, but longer-term inflation expectations have
remained stable.
2. Consistent with its statutory mandate, the Committee seeks to foster maximum
employment and price stability. The Committee expects that, with appropriate policy
accommodation, economic growth will proceed at a moderate pick up from its
recent pace and the unemployment rate will gradually decline toward levels the
Committee judges consistent with its dual mandate. The Committee sees the
downside risks to the outlook for the economy and the labor market as having
diminished since the fall and [ has become | is becoming ] more confident that
labor market conditions will continue to improve over the medium term. The
Committee also anticipates that inflation over the medium term likely will run at or
below its 2 percent objective.
3. To support a stronger economic recovery and to help ensure that inflation, over time,
is at the rate most consistent with its dual mandate, In light of the extent of
improvement in [ economic conditions | the outlook for the labor market ] since
the Committee began its current asset purchase program last September, the
Committee decided to continue purchasing reduce its purchases of additional agency
mortgage-backed securities at to a pace of $40 [ $35 | $30 ] billion per month and of
longer-term Treasury securities at to a pace of $45 [ $40 | $30 ] billion per month.
The Committee is maintaining its existing policy of reinvesting principal payments
from its holdings of agency debt and agency mortgage-backed securities in agency
mortgage-backed securities and of rolling over maturing Treasury securities at
auction. Taken together, these actions The Committee’s sizable and still
increasing holdings of longer-term securities should maintain downward pressure
on longer-term interest rates, support mortgage markets, and help to make keep
broader financial conditions more highly accommodative.
4. The Committee will closely monitor incoming information on economic and financial
developments in coming months. The Committee will continue its purchases of
Treasury and agency mortgage-backed securities, and employ its other policy tools as
appropriate, until the outlook for the labor market has improved substantially in a
context of price stability. In determining the size, pace, and composition of its asset
purchases, the Committee will continue to take appropriate account of the likely
efficacy and costs of such purchases as well as the extent of progress toward its
economic objectives. The Committee’s decisions regarding asset purchases are
not on a preset course and will continue to be contingent on the incoming data.
Specifically, if the economy evolves about as expected, the Committee anticipates
 
 
 
 
further reducing the pace of its securities purchases later this year, but
continuing purchases until the unemployment rate is about 7 percent, economic
growth is sufficient to support continuing solid job gains, and inflation is moving
back toward its 2 percent longer-run goal. The Committee is prepared to increase
or reduce the pace of its purchases as necessary to maintain appropriate policy
accommodation as the outlook for the labor market or inflation changes.
5. To support continued progress toward maximum employment and price stability, the
Committee expects that a highly accommodative stance of monetary policy will
remain appropriate for a considerable time after the asset purchase program ends and
the economic recovery strengthens. In particular, the Committee decided to keep the
target range for the federal funds rate at 0 to ¼ percent and currently continues to
anticipates that this exceptionally low range for the federal funds rate will be
appropriate at least as long as the unemployment rate remains above 6½ percent,
inflation between one and two years ahead is projected to be no more than a half
percentage point above the Committee’s 2 percent longer-run goal, and longer-term
inflation expectations continue to be well anchored. In determining how long to
maintain a highly accommodative stance of monetary policy, the Committee will also
consider other information, including additional measures of labor market conditions,
indicators of inflation pressures and inflation expectations, and readings on financial
developments. When the Committee decides to begin to remove policy
accommodation, it will take a balanced approach consistent with its longer-run goals
of maximum employment and inflation of 2 percent.