FOMC STATEMENT—OCTOBER 2013 ALTERNATIVE C
1. Information received since the Federal Open Market Committee met in July
September suggests that economic activity has been expanding continues to expand
at a moderate pace. Some Indicators of labor market conditions have shown some
further improvement in recent months; in particular, but the unemployment rate,
remains though still elevated, has continued to decline. Household spending and
business fixed investment advanced, and the housing sector has been strengthening,
but continued to strengthen, even though mortgage rates have risen further on
balance in recent months and fiscal policy is restraining economic growth. Apart
from fluctuations due to changes in energy prices, inflation has been running
somewhat below the Committee’s longer-run objective, but longer-term inflation
expectations have remained stable.
2. Consistent with its statutory mandate, the Committee seeks to foster maximum
employment and price stability. The Committee expects that, with appropriate policy
accommodation, economic growth will pick up from its recent pace and the
unemployment rate will gradually decline toward levels the Committee judges
consistent with its dual mandate. The Committee sees the downside risks to the
outlook for the economy and the labor market as having diminished, on net, since last
fall. but the tightening of financial conditions observed in recent months, if sustained,
could slow the pace of improvement in the economy and labor market. The
Committee recognizes that inflation persistently below its 2 percent objective could
pose risks to economic performance, but it anticipates The Committee has become
more confident that labor market conditions will continue to improve and that
inflation will move back toward its 2 percent objective over the medium term.
3. Taking into account the extent of federal fiscal retrenchment over the past year, the
Committee sees the improvement in economic activity and labor market conditions
since it began its asset purchase program a year ago as consistent with growing
underlying strength in the broader economy. However, the Committee decided to
await more evidence that progress will be sustained before adjusting the pace of its
purchases. Accordingly, the Committee decided to continue purchasing additional
agency mortgage-backed securities at a pace of $40 billion per month and longer-term
Treasury securities at a pace of $45 billion per month. In light of the cumulative
progress toward maximum employment and the improvement in the outlook for
labor market conditions, the Committee decided to make modest downward
adjustments in the pace of its of asset purchases. Beginning in November, the
Committee will add to its holdings of agency mortgage-backed securities at a
pace of [ $30 ] billion per month rather than $40 billion per month, and will add
to its holdings of longer-term Treasury securities at a pace of [ $35 ] billion per
month rather than $45 billion per month. The Committee is maintaining its
existing policy of reinvesting principal payments from its holdings of agency debt and
agency mortgage-backed securities in agency mortgage-backed securities and of
rolling over maturing Treasury securities at auction. Taken together, these actions
The Committee’s sizable and still-increasing holdings of longer-term securities
should maintain downward pressure on longer-term interest rates, support mortgage
markets, and help to make broader financial conditions more accommodative, which
 
 
 
 
in turn should promote a stronger economic recovery and help to ensure that inflation,
over time, is at the rate most consistent with the Committee’s dual mandate.
4. The Committee will closely monitor incoming information on economic and financial
developments in coming months and will continue its purchases of Treasury and
agency mortgage-backed securities, and employ its other policy tools as appropriate,
until the outlook for the labor market has improved substantially in a context of price
stability. In judging when to moderate again reduce the pace of asset purchases, the
Committee will, at its coming meetings, assess whether incoming information
continues to support the Committee’s expectation of ongoing improvement in labor
market conditions and inflation moving back toward its longer-run objective. Asset
purchases are not on a preset course, and the Committee’s decisions about their pace
will remain contingent on the Committee’s economic outlook as well as its
assessment of the likely efficacy and costs of such purchases.
OR
4'. The Committee will closely monitor incoming information on economic and financial
developments in coming months and will continue its purchases of Treasury and
agency mortgage-backed securities, and employ its other policy tools as appropriate,
until the outlook for the labor market has improved substantially in a context of price
stability. In judging when to moderate the pace of asset purchases, the Committee
will, at its coming meetings, assess whether incoming information continues to
support the Committee’s expectation of ongoing improvement in labor market
conditions and inflation moving back toward its longer-run objective. In particular,
the Committee intends to continue asset purchases until the level of [ nonfarm
payrolls is [ 1½ | 2 ] million above | the unemployment rate is ½ percentage point
below ] its value in September 2013, and expects to reduce the monthly pace of
purchases roughly in proportion to observed progress toward that level. Asset
purchases are not on a preset course, and the Committee’s Nonetheless, decisions
about their the pace of asset purchases also will remain contingent on the
Committee’s economic outlook for inflation as well as its the Committee’s
assessment of the likely efficacy and costs of such purchases.
5. To support continued progress toward maximum employment and price stability, the
Committee today reaffirmed its view that a highly accommodative stance of monetary
policy will remain appropriate for a considerable time after the asset purchase
program ends and the economic recovery strengthens. In particular, the Committee
decided to keep the target range for the federal funds rate at 0 to ¼ percent and
currently anticipates that this exceptionally low range for the federal funds rate will
be appropriate at least as long as the unemployment rate remains above 6½ percent,
inflation between one and two years ahead is projected to be no more than a half
percentage point above the Committee’s 2 percent longer-run goal, and longer-term
inflation expectations continue to be well anchored. In determining how long to
maintain a highly accommodative stance of monetary policy, the Committee will also
consider other information, including additional measures of labor market conditions,
indicators of inflation pressures and inflation expectations, and readings on financial
developments. When the Committee decides to begin to remove policy
accommodation, it will take a balanced approach consistent with its longer-run goals
of maximum employment and inflation of 2 percent.