FOMC STATEMENT—OCTOBER 2014 ALTERNATIVE B
1. Information received since the Federal Open Market Committee met in July
September suggests that economic activity is expanding at a moderate pace. On
balance, Labor market conditions improved somewhat further; however, with solid
job gains and a lower the unemployment rate. is little changed and On balance, a
range of labor market indicators suggests that there remains significant
underutilization of labor resources is gradually diminishing. Household spending
appears to be is rising moderately and business fixed investment is advancing, while
the recovery in the housing sector remains slow. Fiscal policy is restraining
economic growth, although the extent of restraint is diminishing. Inflation has been
running below the Committee’s longer-run objective. Although market-based
measures of inflation compensation have declined somewhat, survey-based
measures of longer-term inflation expectations have remained stable.
2. Consistent with its statutory mandate, the Committee seeks to foster maximum
employment and price stability. The Committee expects that, with appropriate policy
accommodation, economic activity will expand at a moderate pace, with labor market
indicators and inflation moving toward levels the Committee judges consistent with
its dual mandate. The Committee sees the risks to the outlook for economic activity
and the labor market as nearly balanced. Although inflation in the near term will
likely be held down by lower energy prices and other factors, and the Committee
judges that the likelihood of inflation running persistently below 2 percent has
diminished somewhat since early this year.
3. The Committee currently judges that there has been a substantial improvement in
the outlook for the labor market since the inception of its current asset purchase
program. Moreover, the Committee continues to see is sufficient underlying
strength in the broader economy to support ongoing improvement in labor market
conditions progress toward maximum employment in a context of price stability.
In light of the cumulative progress toward maximum employment and the
improvement in the outlook for labor market conditions since the inception of the
current asset purchase program, the Committee decided to make a further measured
reduction in the pace of its asset purchases. Beginning in October, the Committee will
add to its holdings of agency mortgage-backed securities at a pace of $5 billion per
month rather than $10 billion per month, and will add to its holdings of longer-term
Treasury securities at a pace of $10 billion per month rather than $15 billion per
month. Accordingly, the Committee decided to conclude its asset purchase
program this month. The Committee is maintaining its existing policy of
reinvesting principal payments from its holdings of agency debt and agency
mortgage-backed securities in agency mortgage-backed securities and of rolling over
maturing Treasury securities at auction. This policy, by keeping the Committee’s
sizable and still-increasing holdings of longer-term securities at sizable levels, should
help maintain downward pressure on longer-term interest rates, support mortgage
markets, and help to make broader accommodative financial conditions more
accommodative, which in turn should promote a stronger economic recovery and help
to ensure that inflation, over time, is at the rate most consistent with the Committee’s
dual mandate.
 
 
 
 
4. The Committee will closely monitor incoming information on economic and financial
developments in coming months and will continue its purchases of Treasury and
agency mortgage-backed securities, and employ its other policy tools as appropriate,
until the outlook for the labor market has improved substantially in a context of price
stability. If incoming information broadly supports the Committee’s expectation of
ongoing improvement in labor market conditions and inflation moving back toward
its longer-run objective, the Committee will end its current program of asset
purchases at its next meeting. However, asset purchases are not on a preset course,
and the Committee’s decisions about their pace will remain contingent on the
Committee’s outlook for the labor market and inflation as well as its assessment of
the likely efficacy and costs of such purchases.
4. To support continued progress toward maximum employment and price stability, the
Committee today reaffirmed its view that a highly accommodative stance of monetary
policy the current 0 to ¼ percent target range for the federal funds rate remains
appropriate. In determining how long to maintain the current 0 to ¼ percent this
target range for the federal funds rate, the Committee will assess progress—both
realized and expected—toward its objectives of maximum employment and 2 percent
inflation. This assessment will take into account a wide range of information,
including measures of labor market conditions, indicators of inflation pressures and
inflation expectations, and readings on financial developments. The Committee
continues to anticipate anticipates, based on its current assessment of these factors,
that it likely will be appropriate to maintain the current 0 to ¼ percent target range
for the federal funds rate for a considerable time after following the end of its asset
purchase program ends this month, especially if projected inflation continues to run
below the Committee’s 2 percent longer-run goal, and provided that longer-term
inflation expectations remain well anchored. However, if incoming information
indicates faster progress toward the Committee’s employment and inflation
objectives than the Committee now expects, then increases in the target range
for the federal funds rate are likely to occur sooner than currently anticipated.
Conversely, if progress proves slower than expected, then increases in the target
range are likely to occur later than currently anticipated.
5. When the Committee decides to begin to remove policy accommodation, it will take a
balanced approach consistent with its longer-run goals of maximum employment and
inflation of 2 percent. The Committee currently anticipates that, even after
employment and inflation are near mandate-consistent levels, economic conditions
may, for some time, warrant keeping the target federal funds rate below levels the
Committee views as normal in the longer run.