FOMC STATEMENT—APRIL 2015 ALTERNATIVE B
1. Information received since the Federal Open Market Committee met in January
March suggests that economic growth has moderated somewhat slowed during the
winter months, [ at least ] in part reflecting transitory factors. Labor market
conditions have improved further, with strong The pace of job gains moderated,
and a lower the unemployment rate remained steady. A range of labor market
indicators suggests that underutilization of labor resources continues to diminish was
little changed. Growth in household spending is rising moderately declined;
households’ real incomes rose strongly, partly reflecting earlier declines in energy
prices have boosted household purchasing power, and consumer sentiment remains
high. Business fixed investment is advancing softened, while the recovery in the
housing sector remains remained slow, and exports growth has weakened declined.
Inflation has declined further continued to run below the Committee’s longer-run
objective, largely reflecting earlier declines in energy prices and decreasing prices
of non-energy imports. Market-based measures of inflation compensation remain
low; survey-based measures of longer-term inflation expectations have remained
stable.
2. Consistent with its statutory mandate, the Committee seeks to foster maximum
employment and price stability. Although growth in output and employment
slowed during the first quarter, the Committee expects continues to expect that,
with appropriate policy accommodation, economic activity will expand at a moderate
pace, with labor market indicators continuing to move toward levels the Committee
judges consistent with its dual mandate. The Committee continues to see the risks to
the outlook for economic activity and the labor market as nearly balanced. Inflation
is anticipated to remain near its recent low level in the near term, but the Committee
expects inflation to rise gradually toward 2 percent over the medium term as the labor
market improves further and the transitory effects of declines in energy and import
prices declines and other factors dissipate. The Committee continues to monitor
inflation developments closely.
3. To support continued progress toward maximum employment and price stability, the
Committee today reaffirmed its view that the current 0 to ¼ percent target range for
the federal funds rate remains appropriate. In determining how long to maintain this
target range, the Committee will assess progress—both realized and expected—
toward its objectives of maximum employment and 2 percent inflation. This
assessment will take into account a wide range of information, including measures of
labor market conditions, indicators of inflation pressures and inflation expectations,
and readings on financial and international developments. Consistent with its
previous statement, the Committee judges that an increase in the target range for the
federal funds rate remains unlikely at the April FOMC meeting. The Committee
anticipates that it will be appropriate to raise the target range for the federal funds rate
when it has seen further improvement in the labor market and is reasonably confident
that inflation will move back to its 2 percent objective over the medium term. This
change in the forward guidance does not indicate that the Committee has decided on
the timing of the initial increase in the target range.
 
 
 
 
4. The Committee is maintaining its existing policy of reinvesting principal payments
from its holdings of agency debt and agency mortgage-backed securities in agency
mortgage-backed securities and of rolling over maturing Treasury securities at
auction. This policy, by keeping the Committee’s holdings of longer-term securities
at sizable levels, should help maintain accommodative financial conditions.
5. When the Committee decides to begin to remove policy accommodation, it will take a
balanced approach consistent with its longer-run goals of maximum employment and
inflation of 2 percent. The Committee currently anticipates that, even after
employment and inflation are near mandate-consistent levels, economic conditions
may, for some time, warrant keeping the target federal funds rate below levels the
Committee views as normal in the longer run.