FOMC STATEMENT—APRIL 2015 ALTERNATIVE C
1. Information received since the Federal Open Market Committee met in January
March suggests that economic growth has moderated somewhat slowed during the
winter months, in large part reflecting transitory factors. Labor market
conditions have improved further, with strong job gains and a lower Despite a
steady unemployment rate, a range of some labor market indicators suggests suggest
that underutilization of labor resources continues continued to diminish. Household
spending is rising rose moderately; households’ real incomes rose strongly, partly
reflecting earlier declines in energy prices have boosted household purchasing
power, and consumer sentiment remains high. Business fixed investment is
advancing softened, while the recovery in the housing sector remains remained
slow, and exports growth has weakened declined. Although inflation has declined
further remained below the Committee’s longer-run objective, largely reflecting
earlier declines in energy prices and decreasing prices of non-energy imports, it
was no longer declining. Market-based measures of inflation compensation remain
low; survey-based measures of longer-term inflation expectations have remained
stable.
2. Consistent with its statutory mandate, the Committee seeks to foster maximum
employment and price stability. The Committee expects continues to expect that,
with appropriate policy accommodation, economic activity will expand at a moderate
pace, with labor market indicators continuing to move toward levels the Committee
judges consistent with its dual mandate. The Committee continues to see the risks to
the outlook for economic activity and the labor market as nearly balanced. Inflation
is anticipated to remain near its recent low level in the near term, but the Committee
expects has become [ somewhat ] more confident that inflation to will rise
gradually toward to 2 percent over the medium term as the labor market improves
further and the transitory effects of declines in energy and import prices declines
and other factors dissipate. The Committee continues to monitor inflation
developments closely.
3. To support continued progress toward maximum employment and price stability, the
Committee today reaffirmed its view that the current 0 to ¼ percent target range for
the federal funds rate remains appropriate. The Committee’s current assessment is
that economic conditions [ may | likely will ] soon warrant an increase in the
target range for the federal funds rate. In determining how long to maintain this
when to adjust the target range, the Committee will assess progress—both realized
and expected—toward its objectives of maximum employment and 2 percent
inflation. This assessment will take into account a wide range of information,
including measures of labor market conditions, indicators of inflation pressures and
inflation expectations, and readings on financial and international developments.
Consistent with its previous statement, the Committee judges that an increase in the
target range for the federal funds rate remains unlikely at the April FOMC meeting.
The Committee anticipates that it will be appropriate to raise the target range for the
federal funds rate when it has seen further improvement in the labor market and is
reasonably confident that inflation will move back to its 2 percent objective over the
medium term. This change in the forward guidance does not indicate that the
Committee has decided on the timing of the initial increase in the target range.
 
 
 
 
4. The Committee is maintaining its existing policy of reinvesting principal payments
from its holdings of agency debt and agency mortgage-backed securities in agency
mortgage-backed securities and of rolling over maturing Treasury securities at
auction. This policy, by keeping the Committee’s holdings of longer-term securities
at sizable levels, should help maintain accommodative financial conditions.
5. When the Committee decides to begin to remove policy accommodation, it will take a
balanced approach consistent with its longer-run goals of maximum employment and
inflation of 2 percent. In response to economic and financial developments, the
Committee will adjust the target federal funds rate to promote the attainment of
its objectives of maximum employment and 2 percent inflation. Based on its
economic outlook, the Committee currently anticipates that, even after employment
and inflation are near mandate-consistent levels, economic conditions may, for some
time, warrant keeping the target federal funds rate below levels the Committee views
as normal in the longer run.