ALTERNATIVE C FOR OCTOBER 2015
1. Information received since the Federal Open Market Committee met in July
September suggests that economic activity is has been expanding at a moderate
pace. Household spending and business fixed investment have been increasing
moderately at solid rates in recent months, and the housing sector has improved
further; however, net exports have been soft. The labor market continued to improve,
with solid job gains and declining unemployment. On balance, labor market
indicators show A range of recent labor market indicators, including ongoing job
gains, shows further improvement and confirms that underutilization of labor
resources has diminished appreciably since early this year. Inflation has continued
to run below the Committee’s longer-run objective, partly reflecting declines in
energy prices and in prices of non-energy imports. Although market-based measures
of inflation compensation moved lower; remain near the low end of the range seen
in recent years, survey-based measures of longer-term inflation expectations have
remained stable.
2. Consistent with its statutory mandate, the Committee seeks to foster maximum
employment and price stability. Recent global economic and financial developments
may restrain economic activity somewhat and are likely to put further downward
pressure on inflation in the near term. Nonetheless, The Committee expects that, with
appropriate adjustments in the stance of monetary policy accommodation,
economic activity will expand at a moderate pace, with and labor market indicators
continuing to move toward will reach levels the Committee judges consistent with its
dual mandate. The Committee continues to see sees the risks to the outlook for both
economic activity and the labor market as nearly balanced but is monitoring
developments abroad. Inflation is anticipated to remain near its recent low level in
the near term, reflecting declines in energy prices and in prices of non-energy
imports, but the transitory effects on inflation of these declines will dissipate.
With the labor market continuing to improve, and with survey measures of
longer-term inflation expectations remaining stable, the Committee expects is
reasonably confident that inflation to will rise gradually toward to 2 percent over
the medium term. as the labor market improves further and the transitory effects of
declines in energy and import prices dissipate. The Committee continues to monitor
inflation developments closely.
3. To support continued progress toward maximum employment and price stability, the
Committee today reaffirmed its view that the current 0 to ¼ percent target range for
the federal funds rate remains appropriate. In light of the improvement in labor
market conditions this year, and the Committee’s expectation that inflation will
rise, over the medium term, to its 2 percent objective, the Committee decided to
raise the target range for the federal funds rate to ¼ to ½ percent.
4. In determining how long to maintain this the timing and size of future adjustments
to the target range, the Committee will assess progress—both realized and
expected—toward economic conditions relative to its objectives of maximum
employment and 2 percent inflation [ , and will take a balanced approach to
pursuing those objectives ]. This assessment will take into account a wide range of
information, including measures of labor market conditions, indicators of inflation
 
 
 
 
pressures and inflation expectations, and readings on financial and international
developments. The Committee anticipates that it will be appropriate to raise the
target range for the federal funds rate when it has seen some further improvement in
the labor market and is reasonably confident that inflation will move back to its 2
percent objective over the medium term. The Committee currently anticipates that,
even after employment and inflation are near mandate-consistent levels, economic
conditions may, for some time, warrant keeping the target federal funds rate below
levels the Committee views as normal in the longer run; however, the actual path of
the target for the federal funds rate will depend on the incoming data.
5. The Committee is maintaining its existing policy of reinvesting principal payments
from its holdings of agency debt and agency mortgage-backed securities in agency
mortgage-backed securities and of rolling over maturing Treasury securities at
auction, and anticipates doing so at least during the early stages of normalizing
the level of the federal funds rate. This policy, by keeping the Committee’s
holdings of longer-term securities at sizable levels, should help maintain
accommodative financial conditions.
6. When the Committee decides to begin to remove policy accommodation, it will take a
balanced approach consistent with its longer-run goals of maximum employment and
inflation of 2 percent.
The directive for Alternative C appears later in this section of Tealbook B as part of a
draft “