ALTERNATIVE C FOR JULY 2015
1. Information received since the Federal Open Market Committee met in April June
suggests indicates that economic activity has been expanding moderately after having
changed little during the first quarter in recent months. Growth in household
spending has been moderate and the housing sector has shown some improvement
continued to strengthen; however, business fixed investment and net exports stayed
soft. The pace of labor market continued to improve, with solid job gains picked
up while the and declining unemployment rate remained steady. On balance, a range
of labor market indicators suggests that underutilization of labor resources diminished
somewhat shows an appreciable improvement in labor market conditions since
early this year. Inflation continued to run below the Committee’s longer-run
objective, partly reflecting earlier declines in energy prices and decreasing prices of
non-energy imports; energy prices appear to have stabilized. Market-based measures
of inflation compensation remain low; survey-based measures of longer-term
inflation expectations have remained stable.
2. Consistent with its statutory mandate, the Committee seeks to foster maximum
employment and price stability. The Committee expects that, with appropriate
adjustments in the stance of monetary policy accommodation, economic activity
will expand at a moderate pace, with labor market indicators continuing to move
toward reaching levels the Committee judges consistent with its dual mandate. The
Committee continues to see the risks to the outlook for economic activity and the
labor market as nearly balanced. Although inflation is anticipated to remain near its
recent low level in the near term, but the Committee expects is reasonably confident
that inflation to will rise gradually toward to 2 percent over the medium term as the
labor market improves further and the transitory effects of earlier declines in energy
and import prices dissipate. The Committee continues to monitor inflation
developments closely.
3. To support continued progress toward maximum employment and price stability, the
Committee today reaffirmed its view that the current 0 to ¼ percent target range for
the federal funds rate remains appropriate. In light of the considerable progress
that has been achieved toward the attainment of the Committee’s objective of
maximum employment, and the Committee’s expectation that inflation will rise,
over the medium term, to its 2 percent objective, the Committee decided to raise
the target range for the federal funds to ¼ to ½ percent. Even after this
adjustment, the stance of policy remains highly accommodative and will
continue to support a strong economy.
4. In determining how long to maintain this future adjustments of the target range, the
Committee will assess progress—both realized and expected—toward [ deviations
from | economic conditions relative to ] its objectives of maximum employment and
2 percent inflation [ , and will take a balanced approach to pursuing those
objectives ]. This assessment will take into account a wide range of information,
including measures of labor market conditions, indicators of inflation pressures and
inflation expectations, and readings on financial and international developments. The
Committee anticipates that it will be appropriate to raise the target range for the
federal funds rate when it has seen further improvement in the labor market and is
 
 
 
 
reasonably confident that inflation will move back to its 2 percent objective over the
medium term. The Committee currently anticipates that, even after employment and
inflation are near mandate-consistent levels, economic conditions may, for some time,
warrant keeping the target federal funds rate below levels the Committee views as
normal in the longer run. However, the actual path of the target for the federal
funds rate will depend on the incoming data.
5. The Committee is maintaining its existing policy of reinvesting principal payments
from its holdings of agency debt and agency mortgage-backed securities in agency
mortgage-backed securities and of rolling over maturing Treasury securities at
auction. This policy, by keeping the Committee’s holdings of longer-term securities
at sizable levels, should help maintain accommodative financial conditions.
6. When the Committee decides to begin to remove policy accommodation, it will take a
balanced approach consistent with its longer-run goals of maximum employment and
inflation of 2 percent.
For Alternative C, the “