FOMC STATEMENT—MARCH 2015 ALTERNATIVE B
1. Information received since the Federal Open Market Committee met in December
January suggests that economic activity has been is expanding at a solid moderate
pace. Labor market conditions have improved further, with strong job gains and a
lower unemployment rate. On balance, A range of labor market indicators suggests
that underutilization of labor resources continues to diminish. Household spending is
rising moderately; recent earlier declines in energy prices have boosted household
purchasing power. Business fixed investment is advancing, while the recovery in the
housing sector remains slow and export growth has weakened. Inflation has
declined further below the Committee’s longer-run objective, largely reflecting
earlier declines in energy prices. Market-based measures of inflation compensation
have declined substantially in recent months have reversed part of their previous
decline but remain low; survey-based measures of longer-term inflation expectations
have remained stable.
2. Consistent with its statutory mandate, the Committee seeks to foster maximum
employment and price stability. The Committee expects that, with appropriate policy
accommodation, economic activity will expand at a moderate pace, with labor market
indicators continuing to move toward levels the Committee judges consistent with its
dual mandate. The Committee continues to see the risks to the outlook for economic
activity and the labor market as nearly balanced. Inflation is anticipated to decline
further remain near its recent low level in the near term, but the Committee expects
inflation to rise gradually toward 2 percent over the medium term as the labor market
improves further and the transitory effects of lower earlier energy prices price
declines and other factors dissipate. The Committee continues to monitor inflation
developments closely.
3. To support continued progress toward maximum employment and price stability, the
Committee today reaffirmed its view that the current 0 to ¼ percent target range for
the federal funds rate remains appropriate. In determining how long to maintain this
target range, the Committee will assess progress—both realized and expected—
toward its objectives of maximum employment and 2 percent inflation. This
assessment will take into account a wide range of information, including measures of
labor market conditions, indicators of inflation pressures and inflation expectations,
and readings on financial and international developments. Based on its current
assessment Consistent with its previous statement, the Committee judges that it
can be patient in beginning to normalize the stance of monetary policy an increase in
the target range for the federal funds rate remains unlikely at the April FOMC
meeting. The Committee anticipates that it will be appropriate to raise the
target range for the federal funds rate when it has seen further improvement in
the labor market and is reasonably confident that inflation will move back to its
2 percent objective over the medium term. This change in the forward guidance
does not indicate that the Committee has decided on the timing of the initial
increase in the target range. However, if incoming information indicates faster
progress toward the Committee’s employment and inflation objectives than the
Committee now expects, then increases in the target range for the federal funds rate
are likely to occur sooner than currently anticipated. Conversely, if progress proves
 
 
 
 
slower than expected, then increases in the target range are likely to occur later than
currently anticipated.
4. The Committee is maintaining its existing policy of reinvesting principal payments
from its holdings of agency debt and agency mortgage-backed securities in agency
mortgage-backed securities and of rolling over maturing Treasury securities at
auction. This policy, by keeping the Committee’s holdings of longer-term securities
at sizable levels, should help maintain accommodative financial conditions.
5. When the Committee decides to begin to remove policy accommodation, it will take a
balanced approach consistent with its longer-run goals of maximum employment and
inflation of 2 percent. The Committee currently anticipates that, even after
employment and inflation are near mandate-consistent levels, economic conditions
may, for some time, warrant keeping the target federal funds rate below levels the
Committee views as normal in the longer run.