ALTERNATIVE C FOR SEPTEMBER 2015
1. Information received since the Federal Open Market Committee met in June July
indicates that economic activity has been expanding at a moderately moderate pace,
on average, in recent months this year. Growth in Household spending and
business fixed investment has have been increasing moderately, and the housing
sector has shown additional improvement improved further; however, business
fixed investment and net exports stayed have been soft. The labor market continued
to improve, with solid job gains and declining unemployment. On balance, A range
of recent labor market indicators, including solid job gains and lower
unemployment, suggests shows further improvement in the labor market and
confirms that underutilization of labor resources has diminished since early this year.
Inflation has continued to run below the Committee’s longer-run objective, partly
reflecting earlier declines in energy prices and decreasing in prices of non-energy
imports. Although market-based measures of inflation compensation remain low
moved lower, survey-based measures of longer-term inflation expectations have
remained stable.
2. Consistent with its statutory mandate, the Committee seeks to foster maximum
employment and price stability. The Committee expects that, with appropriate
adjustments in the stance of monetary policy accommodation, economic activity
will expand at a moderate pace, with labor market indicators continuing to move
toward approaching levels the Committee judges consistent with its dual mandate.
The Committee is monitoring developments abroad but continues to see the risks
to the outlook for economic activity and the labor market as nearly balanced.
Inflation is anticipated to remain near its recent low level in the near term, reflecting
declines in energy prices and in prices of non-energy imports, but the transitory
effects on inflation of these declines will dissipate. With the labor market
continuing to improve, and with longer-term inflation expectations remaining
stable, the Committee expects is reasonably confident that inflation to will rise
gradually toward to 2 percent over the medium term as the labor market improves
further and the transitory effects of earlier declines in energy and import prices
dissipate. The Committee continues to monitor inflation developments closely.
3. To support continued progress toward maximum employment and price stability, the
Committee today reaffirmed its view that the current 0 to ¼ percent target range for
the federal funds rate remains appropriate. In light of the considerable further
improvement in labor market conditions this year, and the Committee’s
expectation that inflation will rise, over the medium term, to its 2 percent
objective, the Committee decided to raise the target range for the federal funds
rate to ¼ to ½ percent. Even with this adjustment, the stance of policy remains
highly accommodative.
4. In determining how long to maintain this the timing and size of future adjustments
to the target range, the Committee will assess progress—both realized and
expected—toward economic conditions relative to its objectives of maximum
employment and 2 percent inflation [ , and will take a balanced approach to
pursuing those objectives ]. This assessment will take into account a wide range of
information, including measures of labor market conditions, indicators of inflation
 
 
 
 
pressures and inflation expectations, and readings on financial and international
developments. The Committee anticipates that it will be appropriate to raise the
target range for the federal funds rate when it has seen further improvement in the
labor market and is reasonably confident that inflation will move back to its 2 percent
objective over the medium term. The Committee currently anticipates that, even after
employment and inflation are near mandate-consistent levels, economic conditions
may, for some time, warrant keeping the target federal funds rate below levels the
Committee views as normal in the longer run; however, the actual path of the
target for the federal funds rate will depend on the incoming data.
5. The Committee is maintaining its existing policy of reinvesting principal payments
from its holdings of agency debt and agency mortgage-backed securities in agency
mortgage-backed securities and of rolling over maturing Treasury securities at
auction; the Committee anticipates doing so [ until normalization of the level of
the federal funds rate is well under way | at least during the early stages of
normalization of the level of the federal funds rate ]. This policy, by keeping the
Committee’s holdings of longer-term securities at sizable levels, should help maintain
accommodative financial conditions.
6. When the Committee decides to begin to remove policy accommodation, it will take a
balanced approach consistent with its longer-run goals of maximum employment and
inflation of 2 percent.
The directive for Alternative C appears later in this section of Tealbook B in a draft
“