ALTERNATIVE A FOR DECEMBER 2015
1. Information received since the Federal Open Market Committee met in September
October suggests that economic activity has been expanding at a moderate pace.
Household spending and business fixed investment have been increasing at solid rates
in recent months, and the housing sector has improved further; however, net exports
have been soft. The pace of job gains slowed and the unemployment rate held steady.
Nonetheless, A range of recent labor market indicators, on balance, including
ongoing job gains and declining unemployment, shows further improvement and
confirms that underutilization of labor resources has diminished appreciably since
early this year. In contrast, both overall and core inflation has have continued to
run below the Committee’s longer-run objective, only partly reflecting declines in
energy prices and in prices of non-energy imports. Market-based measures of
inflation compensation moved slightly lower remain low; some survey-based
measures of longer-term inflation expectations have remained stable edged down.
2. Consistent with its statutory mandate, the Committee seeks to foster maximum
employment and price stability. The Committee expects that, with appropriate policy
accommodation, economic activity will expand at a moderate pace, with labor market
indicators continuing to move toward levels the Committee judges consistent with its
dual mandate. The Committee continues to see the risks to the outlook for economic
activity and the labor market as nearly balanced but is monitoring global economic
and financial developments. Inflation is anticipated to remain near its recent low
level in the near term but the Committee expects inflation to rise gradually toward 2
percent over the medium term as the labor market improves further and the transitory
effects of declines in energy and import prices eventually dissipate. The Committee
continues to will closely monitor measures of actual and expected inflation
developments closely.
3. To support continued progress toward maximum employment and price stability
With inflation, core inflation, and gains in labor compensation all subdued, and
with market-based measures of inflation compensation and survey-based
measures of longer-term inflation expectations both low, the Committee today
reaffirmed its view that the current 0 to ¼ percent target range for the federal funds
rate remains appropriate. In determining whether it will be appropriate to raise the
how long to maintain this target range at its next meeting, the Committee will assess
progress—both realized and expected—toward its objectives of maximum
employment and 2 percent inflation. This assessment will take into account a wide
range of information, including measures of labor market conditions, indicators of
inflation pressures and inflation expectations, and readings on financial and
international developments. The Committee anticipates that it will be appropriate to
raise the target range for the federal funds rate when it has seen some further
improvement in the labor market and is reasonably confident that inflation will move
back to its 2 percent objective over the medium term. The Committee is prepared
to provide additional accommodation if incoming information does not soon
indicate that inflation is moving up toward 2 percent.
4. The Committee is maintaining its existing policy of reinvesting principal payments
from its holdings of agency debt and agency mortgage-backed securities in agency
 
 
 
 
mortgage-backed securities and of rolling over maturing Treasury securities at
auction. This policy, by keeping the Committee’s holdings of longer-term securities
at sizable levels, should help maintain accommodative financial conditions.
5. When the Committee decides to begin to remove policy accommodation, it will take a
balanced approach consistent with its longer-run goals of maximum employment and
inflation of 2 percent. The Committee currently anticipates that, even after
employment and inflation are near mandate-consistent levels, economic conditions
may, for some time, warrant keeping the target federal funds rate below levels the
Committee views as normal in the longer run.