ALTERNATIVE A FOR SEPTEMBER 2015
1. Information received since the Federal Open Market Committee met in June July
indicates suggests that economic activity has been is expanding at a moderately
moderate pace in recent months. Growth in Household spending and business fixed
investment has have been increasing moderately, and the housing sector has shown
additional improvement improved further; however, business fixed investment and
net exports stayed have been soft. The labor market continued to improve, with solid
job gains and declining unemployment. On balance, A range of labor market
indicators suggests shows that underutilization of labor resources has diminished
since early this year, but gains in labor compensation have remained subdued.
Both overall and core inflation have continued to run below the Committee’s
longer-run inflation objective, partly reflecting earlier declines in energy prices and
decreasing in prices of non-energy imports. Market-based measures of inflation
compensation remain low are near multiyear lows; survey-based measures of
longer-term inflation expectations have remained stable.
2. Consistent with its statutory mandate, the Committee seeks to foster maximum
employment and price stability. The Committee expects that, with appropriate policy
accommodation, economic activity will expand at a moderate pace, with labor market
indicators continuing to move toward levels the Committee judges consistent with its
dual mandate. However, in light of economic and financial developments abroad,
the Committee continues to sees the risks to the outlook for economic activity and the
labor market as nearly balanced tilted somewhat to the downside. Inflation is
anticipated to remain near its recent very low level in the near term, but as recent
movements in oil prices and exchange rates impose some additional restraint on
inflation. The Committee expects inflation to rise gradually toward 2 percent over
the medium term as the labor market improves further and the transitory effects of
earlier declines in energy and import prices dissipate, The Committee but it continues
to monitor inflation developments closely.
3. With inflation, core inflation, and gains in labor compensation all subdued, and
with market-based measures of inflation compensation very low, the Committee
today reaffirmed its view judges that the current 0 to ¼ percent target range for the
federal funds rate remains appropriate to support continued progress toward
maximum employment and price stability. In determining how long to maintain this
target range, the Committee will assess progress—both realized and expected—
toward its objectives of maximum employment and 2 percent inflation. This
assessment will take into account a wide range of information, including measures of
labor market conditions, indicators of inflation pressures and inflation expectations,
and readings on financial and international developments. The Committee anticipates
that it will be appropriate to raise the target range for the federal funds rate when it
has seen further improvement in the labor market and is reasonably confident that
inflation will move back to its 2 percent objective over the medium term. If
incoming information does not soon indicate that inflation is beginning to move
back toward 2 percent, the Committee is prepared to use all tools necessary to
return inflation to 2 percent within one to two years.
 
 
 
 
4. The Committee is maintaining its existing policy of reinvesting principal payments
from its holdings of agency debt and agency mortgage-backed securities in agency
mortgage-backed securities and of rolling over maturing Treasury securities at
auction. This policy, by keeping the Committee’s holdings of longer-term securities
at sizable levels, should help maintain accommodative financial conditions.
5. When the Committee decides to begin to remove policy accommodation, it will take a
balanced approach consistent with its longer-run goals of maximum employment and
inflation of 2 percent. The Committee currently anticipates that, even after
employment and inflation are near mandate-consistent levels, economic conditions
may, for some time, warrant keeping the target federal funds rate below levels the
Committee views as normal in the longer run.