APRIL 2016 ALTERNATIVE A
1. Information received since the Federal Open Market Committee met in January
March suggests indicates that labor market conditions have improved further
even as growth in economic activity has been expanding at a moderate pace despite
the global economic and financial developments of recent months slowed. Growth
in household spending has been increasing at a moderate rate, and declined. Since
the beginning of the year, the housing sector has improved further; however, but
business fixed investment and net exports have been soft. A range of recent
indicators, including strong job gains, points to additional strengthening of the labor
market. Inflation picked up in recent months; however, it has continued to run below
the Committee’s 2 percent longer-run objective, only partly reflecting earlier
declines in energy prices and in falling prices of non-energy imports. Market-based
measures of inflation compensation remain low; survey-based measures of longer-
term inflation expectations are little changed, on balance, in recent months.
2. Consistent with its statutory mandate, the Committee seeks to foster maximum
employment and price stability. The Committee currently expects that, with gradual
adjustments in the stance of appropriately accommodative monetary policy, growth
in economic activity will expand at pick up to a moderate pace and labor market
indicators will continue to strengthen. However, global economic and financial
developments continue to pose risks. Inflation is expected to remain low in the near
term, in part because of earlier declines in energy prices, but to rise to 2 percent over
the medium term as the transitory effects of declines in energy and import prices
dissipate and the labor market strengthens further. The Committee continues to sees
downside risks to the economic outlook and is closely monitoring inflation,
developments indicators of longer-term inflation expectations, and global
economic and financial developments closely.
3. Against this backdrop, the Committee decided to maintain the target range for the
federal funds rate at ¼ to ½ percent. The stance of monetary policy remains
accommodative, thereby supporting further improvement in labor market conditions
and a return to 2 percent inflation. The Committee judges that an increase in the
target range will not be warranted until inflation moves closer to 2 percent on a
sustained basis and the risks to the economic outlook are more closely balanced.
4. In determining the When adjustments to the target range become appropriate,
their timing and size of future adjustments to the target range for the federal funds
rate, the Committee will assess will depend on the Committee’s assessment of
realized and expected economic conditions relative to its objectives of maximum
employment and 2 percent inflation. This assessment will take into account a wide
range of information, including measures of labor market conditions, indicators of
inflation pressures and inflation expectations, and readings on financial and
international developments. In light of the current shortfall of inflation from 2
percent, the Committee will carefully monitor actual and expected progress toward its
inflation goal. The Committee expects that economic conditions will evolve in a
 
 
 
 
manner that will, for some time, warrant only gradual increases in maintaining the
federal funds rate; the federal funds rate is likely to remain, for some time, below at
levels below those that are expected to prevail in the longer run. However, the actual
path of the federal funds rate will depend on the economic outlook as informed by
incoming data.
5. The Committee is maintaining its existing policy of reinvesting principal payments
from its holdings of agency debt and agency mortgage-backed securities in agency
mortgage-backed securities and of rolling over maturing Treasury securities at
auction, and it anticipates doing so until normalization of the level of the federal
funds rate is well under way. This policy, by keeping the Committee’s holdings of
longer-term securities at sizable levels, should help maintain accommodative
financial conditions.