MARCH 2016 ALTERNATIVE B
1. Information received since the Federal Open Market Committee met in December
January suggests that labor market conditions improved further even as economic
growth slowed late last year economic activity has been expanding at a moderate
pace despite the global economic and financial developments of recent months.
Household spending and business fixed investment have has been increasing at
moderate rates in recent months a solid rate, and the housing sector has improved
further; however, business fixed investment and net exports have been soft and
inventory investment slowed. A range of recent labor market indicators, including
strong job gains, points to some additional decline in underutilization of labor
resources strengthening of the labor market. Inflation has picked up in recent
months; however, it continued to run below the Committee’s 2 percent longer-run
objective, partly reflecting declines in energy prices and in prices of non-energy
imports. Market-based measures of inflation compensation declined further remain
low; survey-based measures of longer-term inflation expectations are little changed,
on balance, in recent months.
2. Consistent with its statutory mandate, the Committee seeks to foster maximum
employment and price stability. The Committee currently expects that, with gradual
adjustments in the stance of monetary policy, economic activity will expand at a
moderate pace and labor market indicators will continue to strengthen. However,
global economic and financial developments continue to pose risks. Inflation is
expected to remain low in the near term, in part because of the further earlier
declines in energy prices, but to rise to 2 percent over the medium term as the
transitory effects of declines in energy and import prices dissipate and the labor
market strengthens further. The Committee is closely monitoring global economic
and financial developments and is assessing their implications for the labor market
and inflation, and for the balance of risks to the outlook. The Committee continues
to monitor inflation developments closely.
3. Given the economic outlook Against this backdrop, the Committee decided to
maintain the target range for the federal funds rate at ¼ to ½ percent. The stance of
monetary policy remains accommodative, thereby supporting further improvement in
labor market conditions and a return to 2 percent inflation.
4. In determining the timing and size of future adjustments to the target range for the
federal funds rate, the Committee will assess realized and expected economic
conditions relative to its objectives of maximum employment and 2 percent inflation.
This assessment will take into account a wide range of information, including
measures of labor market conditions, indicators of inflation pressures and inflation
expectations, and readings on financial and international developments. In light of
the current shortfall of inflation from 2 percent, the Committee will carefully monitor
actual and expected progress toward its inflation goal. The Committee expects that
economic conditions will evolve in a manner that will warrant only gradual increases
in the federal funds rate; the federal funds rate is likely to remain, for some time,
 
 
 
 
below levels that are expected to prevail in the longer run. However, the actual path
of the federal funds rate will depend on the economic outlook as informed by
incoming data.
5. The Committee is maintaining its existing policy of reinvesting principal payments
from its holdings of agency debt and agency mortgage-backed securities in agency
mortgage-backed securities and of rolling over maturing Treasury securities at
auction, and it anticipates doing so until normalization of the level of the federal
funds rate is well under way. This policy, by keeping the Committee’s holdings of
longer-term securities at sizable levels, should help maintain accommodative
financial conditions.