JULY 2016 ALTERNATIVE A
1. Information received since the Federal Open Market Committee met in April June
indicates that the pace of improvement in the labor market has slowed while growth
in strengthened and that economic activity appears to have picked up has been
expanding at a moderate rate. Although the unemployment rate has declined, job
gains have diminished. Job gains were strong in June following weak growth in
May; on average, payrolls have risen at a moderate pace in recent months.
Although some labor market indicators point to improvement in labor market
conditions, the unemployment rate has held steady, on net, since the beginning of
the year. Growth in Household spending has been growing strongly strengthened.
Since the beginning of the year, the housing sector has continued to improve and the
drag from net exports appears to have lessened, but business fixed investment and
residential investment has have been soft. Inflation has continued to run below the
Committee’s 2 percent longer-run objective, only partly reflecting earlier declines in
energy prices and in prices of non-energy imports. Moreover, market-based
measures of inflation compensation declined; and most survey-based measures of
longer-term inflation expectations are little changed, on balance, in recent months
remain near their lows.
2. Consistent with its statutory mandate, the Committee seeks to foster maximum
employment and price stability. The Committee currently expects that, with gradual
adjustments in the stance of appropriate monetary policy accommodation,
economic activity will expand at a moderate pace and labor market indicators will
strengthen further. Inflation is expected to remain low in the near term, in part
because of earlier declines in energy prices, but to rise gradually to 2 percent over
the medium term as the transitory effects of past declines in energy and import prices
dissipate and the labor market strengthens further. The Committee continues to
closely monitor inflation indicators and global economic and financial developments.
In light of global economic and financial developments, the Committee sees the
risks to the U.S. economic outlook as tilted somewhat to the downside.
3. Against this backdrop, the Committee decided to maintain the target range for the
federal funds rate at ¼ to ½ percent. The stance of monetary policy remains
accommodative, thereby supporting further improvement in labor market conditions
and a return to 2 percent inflation. The Committee judges that an increase in the
target range will not be warranted until the risks to the outlook are more closely
balanced and inflation moves closer to 2 percent on a sustained basis.
4. In determining the timing and size of future when adjustments to the target range for
the federal funds rate might become appropriate, the Committee will assess realized
and expected economic conditions relative to its objectives of maximum employment
and 2 percent inflation, along with risks to the economic outlook. This assessment
will take into account a wide range of information, including measures of labor
market conditions, indicators of inflation pressures and inflation expectations, and
readings on financial and international developments. In light of the current shortfall
of inflation from 2 percent, the Committee will carefully monitor actual and expected
progress toward its inflation goal. The Committee expects that economic conditions
sseevviittaannrreettllAA
 
 
 
will evolve in a manner that will warrant only gradual increases in the federal funds
rate; the federal funds rate is likely to remaining, for some time, below levels that are
expected to prevail in the longer run. However, the actual path of the federal funds
rate will depend on the economic outlook as informed by incoming data.
5. The Committee is maintaining its existing policy of reinvesting principal payments
from its holdings of agency debt and agency mortgage-backed securities in agency
mortgage-backed securities and of rolling over maturing Treasury securities at
auction, and it anticipates doing so until normalization of the level of the federal
funds rate is well under way. This policy, by keeping the Committee’s holdings of
longer-term securities at sizable levels, should help maintain accommodative
financial conditions.