JUNE 2017 ALTERNATIVE A
1. Information received since the Federal Open Market Committee met in March May
indicates that the labor market has continued to strengthen even as and that growth in
economic activity slowed has been rising moderately so far this year. Job gains
were solid, on average, in recent months, and Although the unemployment rate has
declined, job gains have slowed in recent months, and wage pressures have
remained subdued. Household spending rose only modestly, but the fundamentals
underpinning the continued growth of consumption remained solid. has picked up,
and business fixed investment firmed has continued to expand. However, Inflation
measured on a 12-month basis, inflation has declined recently has been running
close to and, like the measure the Committee’s 2 percent longer-run objective.
excluding food and energy and food, consumer prices, declined in March and
inflation continued to run is running somewhat below 2 percent. Market-based
measures of inflation compensation remain low; survey-based measures of longer-
term inflation expectations are little changed, on balance.
2. Consistent with its statutory mandate, the Committee seeks to foster maximum
employment and price stability. The Committee views the slowing in growth during
the first quarter as likely to be transitory and continues to expect that, with gradual
adjustments in the stance of monetary policy, economic activity will expand at a
moderate pace, labor market conditions will strengthen somewhat further, and
inflation will stabilize around 2 percent over the medium term. Near-term risks to the
economic outlook appear roughly balanced., but the Committee continues to closely
is monitoring inflation indicators and global economic and financial developments
closely.
3. In view of realized and expected labor market conditions and inflation Against this
backdrop, the Committee decided to maintain the target range for the federal funds
rate at 3/4 to 1 percent while assessing whether the recent lower readings on
inflation were due to transitory factors. The stance of monetary policy remains
accommodative, thereby supporting some further strengthening in labor market
conditions and a sustained return to 2 percent inflation.
4. In determining the timing and size of future adjustments to the target range for the
federal funds rate, the Committee will assess realized and expected economic
conditions relative to its objectives of maximum employment and 2 percent inflation.
This assessment will take into account a wide range of information, including
measures of labor market conditions, indicators of inflation pressures and inflation
expectations, and readings on financial and international developments. The
Committee will carefully monitor actual and expected inflation developments relative
to its symmetric inflation goal. The Committee expects that economic conditions will
evolve in a manner that will warrant gradual increases in the federal funds rate; the
federal funds rate is likely to remain, for some time, below levels that are expected to
prevail in the longer run. However, the actual path of the federal funds rate will
depend on the economic outlook as informed by incoming data.
 
 
 
 
5. The Committee is maintaining its existing policy of reinvesting principal payments
from its holdings of agency debt and agency mortgage-backed securities in agency
mortgage-backed securities and of rolling over maturing Treasury securities at
auction, and it anticipates doing so until normalization of the level of the federal
funds rate is well under way. This policy, by keeping the Committee’s holdings of
longer-term securities at sizable levels, should help maintain accommodative
financial conditions.