ALTERNATIVE A FOR MARCH 2018
1. Information received since the Federal Open Market Committee met in December
January indicates that the labor market has continued to strengthen remained
strong and that while growth in economic activity has been rising at a solid rate
moderated. Job gains in employment, household spending, and business fixed
investment have been solid strong in recent months, and the unemployment rate
has stayed low. Household spending and business fixed investment appear to
be expanding at a moderate pace. On a 12-month basis, both overall inflation
and inflation for items other than food and energy have continued to run below 2
percent. Market-based measures of inflation compensation have increased in
recent months but remain low; survey-based measures of longer-term inflation
expectations are little changed, on balance.
2. Consistent with its statutory mandate, the Committee seeks to foster maximum
employment and price stability. The Committee expects that, with further gradual
adjustments in the stance of appropriate monetary policy accommodation,
economic activity will expand at a moderate pace and labor market conditions
will remain strong. Inflation on a 12‐month basis is expected to move up this year
and to stabilize around the Committee’s 2 percent objective over the medium
term. Near-term risks to the economic outlook appear roughly balanced, but the
Committee is monitoring inflation developments closely.
3. In view of realized and expected labor market conditions and inflation, the
Committee decided to maintain the target range for the federal funds rate at 1-1/4
to 1‐1/2 percent. The stance of monetary policy remains accommodative, thereby
supporting strong labor market conditions and a sustained return to 2 percent
inflation. A temporary period of inflation modestly above 2 percent would be
consistent with the Committee’s symmetric inflation objective and may be
needed to ensure that longer-run inflation expectations are consistent with
that objective.
4. In determining the timing and size of future adjustments to the target range for the
federal funds rate, the Committee will assess realized and expected economic
conditions relative to its objectives of maximum employment and 2 percent
inflation. This assessment will take into account a wide range of information,
including measures of labor market conditions, indicators of inflation pressures
and inflation expectations, and readings on financial and international
developments. The Committee will carefully monitor actual and expected
inflation developments relative to its symmetric inflation goal. The Committee
expects that economic conditions will evolve in a manner that will warrant further
gradual increases in the federal funds rate; the federal funds rate is likely to
remain, for some time, below levels that are expected to prevail in the longer run.
However, the actual path of the federal funds rate will depend on the economic
outlook as informed by incoming data.