ALTERNATIVE C FOR MAY 2018
1. Information received since the Federal Open Market Committee met in January
March indicates that the labor market has continued to strengthen and that
economic activity has been rising at a moderate rate. Job gains have been strong,
on average, in recent months, and the unemployment rate has stayed low. Recent
data suggest that growth rates of indicate that household spending and business
fixed investment have moderated from their strong fourth-quarter readings have
been growing at moderate rates. On a 12-month basis, both overall inflation
and inflation for items other than food and energy have continued to run below
moved close to 2 percent. Market-based measures of inflation compensation
have increased in recent months but remain low; survey-based measures
Indicators of longer-term inflation expectations are little changed, on balance.
2. Consistent with its statutory mandate, the Committee seeks to foster maximum
employment and price stability. The economic outlook has strengthened in recent
months. The Committee expects that, with further gradual adjustments in the
stance of monetary policy, increases in the target range for the federal funds
rate will be consistent with sustained expansion of economic activity and
employment will expand at a moderate pace in the medium term and labor
market conditions will remain strong. and with inflation on a 12-month basis is
expected to move up in coming months and to stabilize around near the
Committee’s symmetric 2 percent objective over the medium term. Near-term
Risks to the economic outlook appear roughly balanced, but the Committee is
monitoring inflation developments closely.
3. In view of realized and expected labor market conditions and inflation, the
Committee decided to raise the target range for the federal funds rate to 1-1/2 to
1-3/4 to 2 percent. The stance of monetary policy remains accommodative,
thereby supporting strong labor market conditions and a sustained return to 2
percent inflation.
4. In determining the timing and size of future adjustments to the target range for the
federal funds rate, the Committee will assess realized and expected economic
conditions relative to its objectives of maximum employment objective and its
symmetric 2 percent inflation goal. This assessment will take into account a
wide range of information, including measures of labor market conditions,
indicators of inflation pressures and inflation expectations, and readings on
financial and international developments. The Committee will carefully monitor
actual and expected inflation developments relative to its symmetric inflation
goal. The Committee expects that economic conditions will evolve in a manner
that will warrant further gradual increases in the federal funds rate; the federal
funds rate is likely to remain, for some time, below levels that are expected to
prevail in the longer run. However, the actual path of the federal funds rate will
depend on the economic outlook as informed by incoming data.