ALTERNATIVE B FOR JANUARY 2018
1. Information received since the Federal Open Market Committee met in November
December indicates that the labor market has continued to strengthen and that
economic activity has been rising at a solid rate. Averaging through hurricane-
related fluctuations, job Gains in employment, household spending, and
business fixed investment have been solid, and the unemployment rate declined
further has stayed low. Household spending has been expanding at a moderate
rate, and growth in business fixed investment has picked up in recent quarters.
On a 12-month basis, both overall inflation and inflation for items other than food
and energy have declined this year and are continued to running below 2 percent.
Market-based measures of inflation compensation remain low; survey-based
measures of longer-term inflation expectations are little changed, on balance.
2. Consistent with its statutory mandate, the Committee seeks to foster maximum
employment and price stability. Hurricane-related disruptions and rebuilding
have affected economic activity, employment, and inflation in recent months but
have not materially altered the outlook for the national economy. Consequently,
The Committee continues to expects that, with further gradual adjustments in the
stance of monetary policy, economic activity will expand at a moderate pace and
labor market conditions will remain strong. Inflation on a 12-month basis is
expected to remain somewhat below 2 percent in the near term but move up this
year and to stabilize around the Committee’s 2 percent objective over the
medium term. Near-term risks to the economic outlook appear roughly balanced,
but the Committee is monitoring inflation developments closely.
3. In view of realized and expected labor market conditions and inflation, the
Committee decided to raise maintain the target range for the federal funds rate to
at 1-1/4 to 1-1/2 percent. The stance of monetary policy remains accommodative,
thereby supporting strong labor market conditions and a sustained return to
2 percent inflation.
4. In determining the timing and size of future adjustments to the target range for the
federal funds rate, the Committee will assess realized and expected economic
conditions relative to its objectives of maximum employment and 2 percent
inflation. This assessment will take into account a wide range of information,
including measures of labor market conditions, indicators of inflation pressures
and inflation expectations, and readings on financial and international
developments. The Committee will carefully monitor actual and expected
inflation developments relative to its symmetric inflation goal. The Committee
expects that economic conditions will evolve in a manner that will warrant
further gradual increases in the federal funds rate; the federal funds rate is likely
to remain, for some time, below levels that are expected to prevail in the longer
run. However, the actual path of the federal funds rate will depend on the
economic outlook as informed by incoming data.