ALTERNATIVE C FOR MARCH 2018
1. Information received since the Federal Open Market Committee met in December
January indicates that the labor market has continued to strengthen and that
economic activity has been rising at a solid rate. Job gains in employment,
household spending, and business fixed investment have been solid strong in
recent months, and the unemployment rate has stayed low. Household
spending and business fixed investment have been growing at solid rates, on
average, in recent quarters. On a 12-month basis, both overall inflation and
inflation for items other than food and energy have increased from their lows
last summer but have continued to run below 2 percent. Market-based measures
of inflation compensation have increased in recent months but remain low;
survey-based measures of longer-term inflation expectations are little changed, on
balance.
2. Consistent with its statutory mandate, the Committee seeks to foster maximum
employment and price stability. The economic outlook has strengthened in
recent months. The Committee expects that, with further gradual adjustments in
the stance of monetary policy, economic activity and employment will expand at
a moderate pace and labor market conditions will remain strong sustainable rates
in the medium term. Inflation on a 12‐month basis is expected to move up this
year in coming months and then to stabilize around the Committee’s 2 percent
objective over the medium term. Near-term risks to the economic outlook appear
roughly balanced, but the Committee is monitoring inflation developments
closely.
3. In view of realized and expected labor market conditions and inflation, the
Committee decided to maintain raise the target range for the federal funds rate at
1-1/4 to 1‐1/2 to 1-3/4 percent. The stance of monetary policy remains
accommodative, thereby supporting strong labor market conditions and a
sustained return to 2 percent inflation.
4. In determining the timing and size of future adjustments to the target range for the
federal funds rate, the Committee will assess realized and expected economic
conditions relative to its objectives of maximum employment and 2 percent
inflation. This assessment will take into account a wide range of information,
including measures of labor market conditions, indicators of inflation pressures
and inflation expectations, and readings on financial and international
developments. The Committee will carefully monitor actual and expected
inflation developments relative to its symmetric inflation goal. The Committee
expects that economic conditions will evolve in a manner that will warrant further
gradual increases in the federal funds rate; the federal funds rate is likely to
remain, for some time, below levels that are expected to prevail in the longer run.
However, the actual path of the federal funds rate will depend on the economic
outlook as informed by incoming data.