ALTERNATIVE A FOR JUNE 2019
1. Information received since the Federal Open Market Committee met in March
May indicates that the labor market remains strong and that economic activity
rose is rising at a solid moderate rate. Job gains have been solid, on average, in
recent months, and the unemployment rate has remained low. Although growth
of household spending and appears to have picked up from earlier in the year,
indicators of business fixed investment slowed in the first quarter have been
soft. On a 12-month basis, overall inflation and inflation for items other than
food and energy have declined and are running below 2 percent. On balance,
Market-based measures of inflation compensation have remained low in recent
months, and declined; survey-based measures of longer-term inflation
expectations are little changed.
2. Consistent with its statutory mandate, the Committee seeks to foster maximum
employment and price stability. In support of these goals light of heightened
uncertainties about the economic outlook and muted inflation pressures, the
Committee decided to maintain lower the target range for the federal funds rate at
to 2 to 2-1/4 to 2-1/2 percent. The Committee also decided to conclude the
reduction of its aggregate securities holdings in the System Open Market
Account at the end of July; thereafter, reinvestments will occur as specified
in the Committee’s statement of Balance Sheet Normalization Principles and
Plans. With these actions, the Committee continues to view sustained expansion
of economic activity, strong labor market conditions, and inflation near the
Committee’s symmetric 2 percent objective as the most likely outcomes. In light
of global economic and financial developments and muted inflation pressures,
The Committee will be patient as it determines what future is prepared to
adjustments to the target range for the federal funds rate may be as appropriate to
support these outcomes.
3. In determining the timing and size of future adjustments to the target range for the
federal funds rate, the Committee will assess realized and expected economic
conditions relative to its maximum employment objective and its symmetric 2
percent inflation objective. This assessment will take into account a wide range
of information, including measures of labor market conditions, indicators of
inflation pressures and inflation expectations, and readings on financial and
international developments.