ALTERNATIVE C FOR JANUARY 2019
1. Information received since the Federal Open Market Committee met in November
December indicates that the labor market has continued to strengthen and that
economic activity has been rising at a strong rate. Job gains have been strong
robust, on average, in recent months, and the unemployment rate has remained
low. Household spending has continued to grow strongly, while growth of
business fixed investment has appears to have moderated from its rapid pace
earlier in the year picked up. On a 12-month basis, both overall inflation and
inflation for items other than food and energy remain near 2 percent. Indicators
of longer-term inflation expectations are little changed, on balance.
2. Consistent with its statutory mandate, the Committee seeks to foster maximum
employment and price stability. The Committee judges that some further gradual
increases in the target range for the federal funds rate will be consistent with
sustained expansion of economic activity, strong labor market conditions, and
inflation near the Committee’s symmetric 2 percent objective over the medium
term. The Committee judges that risks to the economic outlook are roughly
balanced, but will continue to monitor global economic and financial
developments and assess their implications for the economic outlook.
3. In view of realized and expected labor market conditions and inflation, the
Committee decided to raise maintain the target range for the federal funds rate to
at 2-1/4 to 2-1/2 percent.
4. In determining the timing and size of future adjustments to the target range for the
federal funds rate, the Committee will assess realized and expected economic
conditions relative to its maximum employment objective and its symmetric
2 percent inflation objective. This assessment will take into account a wide range
of information, including measures of labor market conditions, indicators of
inflation pressures and inflation expectations, and readings on financial and
international developments.