ALTERNATIVE C FOR OCTOBER 2019
1. Information received since the Federal Open Market Committee met in July
September indicates that the labor market remains strong and that economic
activity has been rising at a moderate rate. Job gains have been solid, on average,
in recent months, and the unemployment rate has remained low declined.
Although household spending has been rising at a strong pace, business fixed
investment and exports have weakened remain weak. On a 12-month basis,
overall inflation and inflation for items other than food and energy are running
below 2 percent. Market-based measures of inflation compensation remain low;
survey-based measures of longer-term inflation expectations are little changed.
2. Consistent with its statutory mandate, the Committee seeks to foster maximum
employment and price stability. In light of the implications of global
developments for the economic outlook as well as muted inflation pressures
support of these goals, the Committee decided to lower maintain the target
range for the federal funds rate to at 1-3/4 to 2 percent. This action supports The
Committee’s continues to view that sustained expansion of economic activity,
strong labor market conditions, and inflation near the Committee’s symmetric
2 percent objective are as the most likely outcomes, but uncertainties about this
outlook remain. As The Committee contemplates the future path of the target
range for the federal funds rate, it will continue to monitor the implications of
incoming information for the economic outlook and will act as appropriate to
sustain the expansion, with a strong labor market and inflation near its symmetric
2 percent objective as it assesses the appropriate path of the target range for
the federal funds rate.
3. In determining the timing and size of future adjustments to the target range for the
federal funds rate, the Committee will assess realized and expected economic
conditions relative to its maximum employment objective and its symmetric
2 percent inflation objective. This assessment will take into account a wide range
of information, including measures of labor market conditions, indicators of
inflation pressures and inflation expectations, and readings on financial and
international developments.