ALTERNATIVE A FOR JANUARY 2019
1. Information received since the Federal Open Market Committee met in November
December indicates that the labor market has continued to strengthen and that
economic activity has been rising at a strong rate. Job gains have been strong, on
average, in recent months, and the unemployment rate has remained low.
Household spending has continued to grow strongly, while growth of business
fixed investment has moderated from its rapid pace earlier in the last year. On a
12-month basis, both overall inflation and inflation for items other than food and
energy remain near 2 percent. Indicators of longer-term inflation expectations are
little changed, on balance. Although market-based measures of inflation
compensation have moved lower in recent months, survey-based measures of
longer-term inflation expectations are little changed.
2. Consistent with its statutory mandate, the Committee seeks to foster maximum
employment and price stability. In support of these goals, the Committee
decided to maintain the target range for the federal funds rate at 2-1/4 to
2-1/2 percent. The Committee judges that some further gradual increases in the
target range for the federal funds rate will be consistent with continues to view
sustained expansion of economic activity, strong labor market conditions, and
inflation near the Committee’s symmetric 2 percent objective over the medium
term as the most likely outcomes. In light of global economic and financial
developments and muted inflation pressures, the Committee judges that the
risks to the economic outlook are tilted to the downside and that it will be
patient as it determines what, if any, adjustments to the target range for the
federal funds rate may be appropriate to support these outcomes. The
Committee judges that risks to the economic outlook are roughly balanced, but
will continue to monitor global economic and financial developments and assess
their implications for the economic outlook.
3. In view of realized and expected labor market conditions and inflation, the
Committee decided to raise the target range for the federal funds rate to 2-1/4 to
2-1/2 percent.
4. In determining the timing and size of future adjustments to the target range for the
federal funds rate, the Committee will assess realized and expected economic
conditions relative to its maximum employment objective and its symmetric
2 percent inflation objective. This assessment will take into account a wide range
of information, including measures of labor market conditions, indicators of
inflation pressures and inflation expectations, and readings on financial and
international developments.