ALTERNATIVE C FOR SEPTEMBER 2020
1. The Federal Reserve is committed to using its full range of tools to support the
U.S. economy in this challenging time, thereby promoting its maximum
employment and price stability goals.
2. The coronavirus outbreak COVID-19 pandemic is causing tremendous human
and economic hardship across the United States and around the world. Following
sharp declines, Economic activity and employment have picked up somewhat in
recent months but remain well below their levels at the beginning of the year.
Weaker demand and significantly lower oil prices are holding down consumer
price inflation. Overall financial conditions have improved in recent months, in
part reflecting policy measures to support the economy and the flow of credit to
U.S. households and businesses.
3. The path of the economy will depend significantly on the course of the virus. The
ongoing public health crisis will continue to weigh heavily on economic activity,
employment, and inflation in the near term, and poses considerable risks to the
economic outlook over the medium term.
4. The Committee seeks to achieve maximum employment and inflation at the
rate of 2 percent over the longer run. With inflation running persistently
below this longer-run goal, the Committee will aim to achieve inflation
moderately above 2 percent for some time so that inflation averages 2 percent
over time and longer-term inflation expectations remain well anchored at 2
percent. In light of these developments support of these goals, the Committee
decided to maintain the target range for the federal funds rate at 0 to 1/4 percent.
The Committee expects to maintain this target range until it is confident that the
economy has weathered recent events and is on track to achieve its maximum
employment and price stability goals. To support the flow of credit to households
and businesses In addition, over coming months the Federal Reserve will increase
its holdings of Treasury securities and agency residential and commercial
mortgage-backed securities at least at the current pace to sustain smooth market
functioning, thereby fostering effective transmission of monetary policy to broader
and help foster accommodative financial conditions, thereby supporting the
flow of credit to households and businesses. In addition, the Open Market Desk
will continue to offer large-scale overnight and term repurchase agreement
operations. The Committee will closely monitor developments and is prepared to
adjust its plans as appropriate.
5. In assessing the appropriate stance of monetary policy, the Committee will
continue to monitor the implications of incoming information for the economic
outlook, including information related to public health, as well as global
developments and muted inflation pressures, and will use its tools and act as
appropriate to support the economy. In determining the timing and size of future
adjustments to the stance of monetary policy, the Committee will assess realized
and expected economic conditions relative to its maximum employment objective
and its symmetric 2 percent inflation objective. This The Committee would be
prepared to adjust the stance of monetary policy as appropriate if risks
 
 
 
 
emerge that could impede the attainment of the Committee’s goals. The
Committee’s assessments will take into account a wide range of information,
including measures of readings on public health, labor market conditions,
indicators of inflation pressures and inflation expectations, and readings on
financial and international developments.