Home Page
Communication and publications
Press Releases
The Monetary Committee decides on April 6, 2020 to reduce the interest rate by 0.15 percentage points to 0.1 percent
The Monetary Committee decides on April 6, 2020 to reduce the interest rate by 0.15 percentage points to 0.1 percent
Back
The Monetary Committee decides on April 6, 2020 to reduce the interest rate by 0.15 percentage points to 0.1 percent
The Monetary Committee decides on April 6, 2020
to reduce the interest rate by 0.15 percentage points to 0.1 percent
06/04/2020
Share:
In
addition, the Committee decided on 2 additional steps:
To put a new monetary
instrument into operation: Provision of monetary loans to banks for a term of 3
years, with a fixed interest rate of 0.1 percent. The loans are contingent on
extending credit to small and micro businesses.
The expansion of the plan
through which repo transactions are carried out vis-à-vis financial entities,
so that the agreements can include corporate bonds (in addition to government
bonds) as security. This step will strengthen the plan’s support of liquidity and
the orderly functioning of the financial markets.
An
expanded explanation of these two steps is published in a separate press
release.
The coronavirus crisis
halted the trend of growth and the economy has shifted into contraction.  More than one-third of the economy is shut
down, private consumption is lower by about one-quarter relative to the
pre-crisis period, and approximately 1 million workers, 24 percent of the
workforce, have claimed unemployment benefits.
According to the Research
Department’s assessment, GDP contracted by approximately 5 percent in the first
quarter (quarterly terms). Based on the Department’s macroeconomic forecast,
assuming that the main part of the coronavirus restrictions are removed
gradually by the end of June, negative growth of approximately 5 percent is
expected in 2020, with an unemployment rate of 6 percent (annual average). The
beginning of a recovery in the third quarter will lead to growth of 9 percent
in 2021, though the unemployment rate is expected to decline gradually and only
toward the end of 2021 will it approach the low pre-crisis levels. The debt to
GDP ratio is expected to reach about 75 percent in 2020. Note that there is
considerable uncertainty regarding the forecast crisis, in view of the lack of
clarity about the length and magnitude of the crisis.
Global growth is expected
to contract markedly in 2020, and the spread of the crisis has led to very strong
policy responses by central banks and governments. Commodity prices collapsed
by tens of percent. In China, a recovery in economic activity is starting to be
observed.
The crisis led to a shock
in capital markets in Israel and worldwide, with steep declines in equity
prices and an increase in volatility and risk. In Israel, the sharp increase in
government bond yields and in corporate bond spreads was halted following measures
taken by the Bank of Israel and the halt of mutual fund withdrawals.
There was exceptional volatility
in the exchange rate, against the background of dollar liquidity distress in
Israel and worldwide. The swap transactions carried out by the Bank of Israel
moderated the volatility, and at the end of the period, the shekel had weakened
by 5.8 percent against the dollar and by 3.4 percent in terms of the effective
exchange rate.
​     ​The inflation environment
that was low even prior to the crisis declined sharply. The 1-year inflation
expectations decreased further, but expectations for longer terms remained
stable. In the short term there could be difficulty in measuring the inflation
rate.
In view of the magnitude of the crisis’s adverse
impact on economic activity, the Committee is utilizing a range of tools in
order to increase the extent of the monetary policy accommodation and to ensure
the orderly functioning of the financial markets. The Committee will expand the
use of the existing tools, including the interest rate tool, and will be able to
operate additional ones, to the extent that the crisis lengthens and it is
necessary to achieve the monetary policy goals and to moderate the negative
economic impact created as a result of the crisis.
Full data file ​
For the file of figures accompanying this notice, clickhere.​
The coronavirus crisis halted the trend of growth, and in March, the
economy started to contract. Approximately 1 million workers claimed
unemployment benefits during March, 850,000 more than in February, with 90
percent of them on the basis of being placed on unpaid leave, and the number of
people seeking work makes up about 24 percent of the labor force. An analysis
of the negative impact on private consumption—in accordance with the magnitude
of the Ministry of Health’s limitations on the various consumption items and
the weight of each item in the household consumption basket—indicates that
private consumption is about 27 percent lower than its pre-crisis level. An industry-by-industry
analysis of the impact of the crisis on GDP and employment in the economy’s industries
indicates that given the current guidance by the Ministry of Health, the total
adverse impact on GDP is about 37 percent. The scope of the shutdown is
particularly high in industries in which wages are low, so that the ability of workers
in those industries to bear a long shutdown is relatively limited. The same
analysis indicates that the negative impact on the labor input is about 45
percent, and in addition to employees who were laid off or were placed on
unpaid leave, it reflects the scope of part time work among workers who remain
employed or who were placed on paid leave. These estimates suggest that in the first
quarter, the economy contracted by 5 percent compared with the previous quarter
(in quarterly terms). The Bank of Israel’s Companies Survey points to a sharp
decline in the net balance of the business sector, with most industries reporting
a sharp negative impact on demand, while the negative impact on supply is
focused on the hotels industry (against the background of financing
constraints) and construction (a shortage of workers). Based on the Research
Department’s macroeconomic forecast, assuming that there won’t be a further
increase in the severity of the coronavirus restrictions in Israel beyond those
already imposed, and that the main part of the limitations that are barriers to
economic activity will be removed gradually by the end of June, the economy is
expected to contract by 5.3 percent in 2020, and to grow by 8.7 percent in
2021, though the unemployment rate is expected to decline gradually and only return
to the low pre-crisis levels toward the end of 2021. The government budget
deficit is expected to increase to 11 percent of GDP in 2020, taking into
account the budget plan announced by the government to deal with the crisis and
the expected decline in revenues due to a slowdown in activity. The debt to GDP
ratio is expected to increase to 75 percent. The Research Department emphasized
that the crisis is unprecedented and it is therefore difficult to assess the
extent and magnitude of its economic ramifications, and it assesses that a
deferral of an additional month in removing the limitations and a further
deterioration in world trade will lead to contraction of 8.8 percent in GDP in
2020, and will increase the average unemployment rate for 2020 by 2 additional
percentage points.
In March, there were shocks in capital markets in Israel and abroad.
Equity market indices in major economies declined by approximately 30 percent,
and afterward most of them offset part of the decline against the background of
steps by central banks and the governments. Yields in government and corporate
bond markets were particularly volatile and there was a sharp rise in risk spreads.
In Israel, the Tel Aviv 35 Index declined by approximately 25 percent, and the
steep increase in government bond yields and in corporate bond spreads was
halted after the announcement of the Bank of Israel’s program in the government
bond market and the halt in the trend of mutual fund withdrawals, which at its
height reached NIS 8 billion per day.
Before the outbreak of the coronavirus crisis, there was an additional
decline in the inflation environment. The CPI declined by 0.4 percent in January
and by 0.1 percent in February, so that the year over year inflation rate
continued to fall, reaching 0.1 percent, with a moderate decrease in inflation
expectations, from all sources, as well. With the outbreak of the crisis,
1-year inflation expectations declined further. While inflation expectations derived
from the capital market are apparently impacted by trading conditions in the
bond market, there was a decline in expectations from the other sources as
well, partly as a result of the rapid decrease in global prices of oil and
other commodities. Expectations for longer terms did not change markedly.
Although the adverse impact in the supply chain of many goods may lead to price
increases from the supply side, the effect of the decrease in demand is
apparently more notable, and is expected to lead to a decline in inflation in
the coming months. The depreciation will offset the forces for a decline in
inflation. However, a methodological difficulty is expected in calculating the CPI
and in analyzing the meaning of the inflation rate so long as the strict
limitations on economic activity lead to numerous goods and services not being
consumed, and their prices not being able to be measured (this difficulty is
relevant to 20 percent of the weight of CPI components). There was a sharp
change in the composition of households’ consumption basket.
There was anomalous volatility in the exchange rate during March,
against the background of the dollar liquidity distress resulting from dollar
margin calls after the sharp declines in global equity markets. From the previous
interest rate decision through March 17th, the shekel weakened by 11
percent in effective exchange rate terms. However, after the Bank of Israel conducted
the shekel/dollar swap transactions, the volatility declined and the shekel
weakness moderated to about 5.8 percent against the dollar and 3.4 percent in
terms of the effective exchange rate since the previous interest rate decision.
The depreciation is expected to support the profitability of exports,
particularly manufacturing exports.
Around the world, more than 1 million people have already contracted
the coronavirus and tens of thousands have died, and it remains difficult to
estimate the magnitude of the negative economic impact. According to
assessments by the international institutions, global growth is expected to
contract markedly in 2020 and a very sharp decline in world trade is expected,
but the range of the forecasts is extremely wide. Sentiment indices also point
to contraction in activity. In China, the slowdown in the spread of the virus
enabled authorities there to reduce the restrictions on the population, and
data indicate a gradual return of economic activity, so that moderate but
positive growth is expected in 2020. The spread of the crisis led to a sharp
policy response by central banks and governments. Most central banks reduced
interest rates markedly and adopted a range of expansionary measures and supply
of liquidity to the markets. Governments announced extensive plans to expand
public expenditure, compensation for those adversely impacted by the crisis,
and the extension of credit to the business sector. The slowdown in economic
activity led to a sharp decline in commodity prices, and the price of oil
dropped by tens of percent, against the background as well of a lack of
agreement between the main oil producers to cut output.
The minutes of the monetary discussions prior to this interest rate
decision will be published on April 20, 2020. The next decision regarding the
interest rate will be published at 16:00 on Monday, May 25, 2020.​
​