Home Page
Communication and publications
Press Releases
The Monetary Committee decides on August 24, 2020 to keep the interest rate unchanged at 0.1 percent
The Monetary Committee decides on August 24, 2020 to keep the interest rate unchanged at 0.1 percent
Back
The Monetary Committee decides on August 24, 2020 to keep the interest rate unchanged at 0.1 percent
The Monetary Committee decides on August 24, 2020
to keep the interest rate unchanged at 0.1 percent
24/08/2020
Share:
The second wave of the
Covid-19 pandemic continues to leave its mark on the economy, and there is a two-way
feedback loop between the economic business cycle and the morbidity cycle.
According to the National
Accounts data, second quarter GDP was approximately 11 percent lower than what
would have been expected without the crisis. The main negative impact has been on
domestic activity—private consumption and investment—as the negative impact on
exports has been more moderate, while a mitigating factor was the increase in
public consumption. Real time indicators of activity show that after the relatively
rapid recovery of economic activity in June, the pace of recovery has slowed in
July and August. Labor market weakness continued, with the “broad unemployment
rate” at 12 percent.
The Research Department’s
staff forecast describes 2 possible scenarios. In the relatively optimistic
scenario, in which control of the spread of the virus is maintained, GDP is
expected to contract by 4.5 percent in 2020 and to grow by 6 percent in 2021.
In the more severe scenario, in which there is only partial control of the pandemic,
accompanied by a further deterioration in the global situation, negative growth
of 7 percent is expected in 2020 and growth of only 3 percent in 2021.The debt
to GDP ratio in 2021 is expected to be 78 percent in the optimistic scenario
and 87 percent under the pessimistic scenario.
The global economy
contracted sharply in the second quarter of the year. Forecasts by investment houses
expect positive growth in the second half of the year, but for the full year of
2020 a marked contraction in GDP is expected in most economies. The removal of
closures and reduction in social distancing enacted in many countries led to partial
economic recovery. Central banks in advanced economies continue to implement
the special monetary measures they announced in response to the crisis.
Financial markets remain
stable. An improvement is apparent in the credit market’s functioning, with
stability in interest rates, supported by the Bank of Israel's measures and the
government-guaranteed credit funds. Government bond yields remain low, and Bank
of Israel activity in the corporate bond market contributed to a notable
decline in spreads. The equity market rose.
Since the previous interest
rate decision, the shekel weakened by 0.6 percent in terms of the nominal
effective exchange rate, against the background of depreciation against the
euro, but strengthened by 1.1 percent against the dollar. The exchange rate is weighing
on the recovery of exports, particularly in view of the decline in global
demand, and on the return of the inflation to the target.
​The inflation environment
remained low. The inflation rate in the past 12 months was -0.6 percent. Inflation
expectations for the coming year, from all sources, remained below the lower
bound of the target range, while forward expectations of inflation at the end
of the second year are slightly below the lower bound of the target range, and longer-term
expectations are anchored within the target range.
In view of the magnitude of the crisis’s adverse impact on economic
activity, the Committee continues to implement a range of tools in order to
increase the extent of the monetary policy accommodation and to ensure the continued
orderly functioning of the financial markets. The Committee will expand the use
of the existing tools, including the interest rate tool, and will operate
additional ones, to the extent that it assesses that the crisis is lengthening and
that it is necessary in order to achieve the monetary policy goals and to
moderate the negative economic impact created as a result of the crisis.
For the file of
figures accompanying this notice, click here​​.
The second wave of the Covid-19 pandemic continues to leave its mark
on the economy, and there is a two-way feedback loop between the economic
business cycle and the morbidity cycle. An increase in economic activity causes
an increase in morbidity, which in turn leads to social distancing measures,
which lower the rate of morbidity and allow a gradual return of economic
activity, in a cycle that repeats itself. Economic activity remains moderated,
and an analysis of developments shows that the impact of the crisis on demand in
the economy is more severe than its impact on supply.
According to the first estimate of National Accounts data for the
second quarter of 2020 (Figure 1 in the attached data file), GDP
contracted by 28.7 percent (in annual terms), and its level is about 11 percent
lower than what would have been expected without the crisis. The main adverse impact
is on domestic activity—private consumption and investment, particularly
investment in residential construction—while the impact on exports is slightly more
moderate. There was an increase in public consumption, in view of the response
of government policy to the crisis. An analysis of the real time indicators of
activity shows that after the relatively rapid recovery in June, there was a
slowing in the pace of recovery in July and August. The level of credit card
purchases in July was lower than the baseline based on data from previous
years, but since the beginning of August, there has been an increase in
purchases, and as of mid-August, the level is higher than the baseline level (Figure
3). Of particular note have been the increases in credit card expenditure
in the restaurant industry and the education and leisure services industry,
which until recent weeks had typically been stable at low activity levels, while
tourism remains very low. The indices of mobility to workplaces moderated in
July to about 20–30 percent below their pre-crisis level, but at the beginning
of August, there was an increase in mobility to places of retail and recreation,
and leisure (Figure 4). The findings of the most recent real-time survey
conducted by the Central Bureau of Statistics, at the beginning of July, show a
worsening of the adverse impact to business revenue and the share of workers
who are employed (Figures 8–9). Uncertainty regarding the ways to deal
with the health situation, as well as uncertainty regarding the date on which the
budget for 2021will be approved are liable to have a negative impact on
continued economic recovery.
Despite the difficulty in precisely assessing the state of the labor
market in view of the variance in data from various sources, all the data still
indicate significant weakness. According to data published by the Central
Bureau of Statistics Labor Force Survey, the “broad unemployment rate”, which
includes the unemployed, those temporarily absent from work for reasons related
to the Covid-19 crisis, and those dismissed from their positions between March
and July who are not looking for work, is about 12 percent (for those aged 15
and above).
The Research Department updated its macroeconomic forecast, to reflect
two possible scenarios. In the relatively optimistic scenario, in which there
is control over the pandemic, GDP is expected to contract by 4.5 percent in
2020, and the “broad unemployment rate” is forecast to be 11.5 percent. In
comparison, in a more severe scenario where only partial control of the pandemic
is achieved and there is a further worsening of the situation globally, the
forecast expects a contraction of 7 percent and an unemployment rate of 13.6
percent. In the first scenario, GDP is expected to grow by 6 percent in 2021,
compared with 3 percent in the more serious scenario. Under the optimistic
scenario, the deficit is expected to be 13.2 percent in 2020 and 8.2 percent in
2021, and the debt to GDP ratio is expected to be 75 percent in 2020 and 78
percent in 2021. In the pessimistic scenario, the deficit is expected to be
14.6 percent in 2020 and 12 percent in 2021, and the debt to GDP ratio is
expected to be 78 percent in 2020 and 87 percent in 2021.
The inflation environment remained low. The CPI for June declined by
0.1 percent, while the CPI for July increased by 0.2 percent. Inflation over
the past 12 months was -0.6 percent, compared with -1.6 percent in the previous
month (Figure 11). The increase in fuel prices made a significant
contribution to the increase in annual inflation, by reducing the negative
contribution of the energy component in the CPI. The CPI excluding energy,
fruit and vegetables showed an inflation rate of -0.4 percent, similar to the
level in the previous two months (Figure 12). An analysis by the
Research Department shows that adjusting the household consumption basket to
reflect changes in consumption patterns due to the crisis results in annual
inflation being only about 0.2 percent higher than the official inflation rate.
Inflation expectations for the coming year, from all sources, remained below
the lower bound of the target range. In the coming months, the annual inflation
rate is expected to remain negative. Medium-term forward inflation expectations
have increased, such that inflation expectations at the end of the second year
are slightly below the lower bound of the inflation target, and longer-term
expectations are anchored within the target range.
Since the previous interest rate decision, the shekel weakened by 0.6
percent in terms of the nominal effective exchange rate, against the background
of depreciation against the euro, but strengthened by 1.1 percent against the
dollar. The exchange rate is weighing on the recovery of exports, particularly
in view of the decline in global demand, and on the return of the inflation to
the target.
Financial markets remain stable. An improvement is apparent in the credit
market’s functioning, with stability in interest rates, supported by Bank of
Israel measures and the government-guaranteed credit funds (Figures 22–23).
Government bond yields remain low, and Bank of Israel intervention in the
corporate bond market, which began in July, contributed to a notable decline in
spreads on the main Tel Bond indices (Figures 18–19). The equity market
was characterized by price increases in line with the global trend.
The pace of increase in home and rental prices moderated. Home prices
increased in May–June by 0.4 percent following a decline of 0.8 percent in
April–May, and the annual rate of increase moderated markedly, from an annual
rate of more than 3 percent in the months prior to March–April to an annual
rate of 1.9 percent. The increase in rental prices also moderated to 1.2
percent.
The global economy contracted sharply in the second quarter of the
year, as a result of the pandemic and social distancing measures. Investment
houses expect positive growth in the second half of the year, but it will be
weaker than the contraction that has taken place, and will provide only a
“partial correction” to the data from the first half of the year, so that,
other than China, GDP is expected to contract significantly in all of the major
economies in 2020 (Figure 24). The removal of closures and reduction in
social distancing enacted in many countries led to some recovery, but the
economy is far from having returned to its pre-crisis activity levels. Evidence
of some improvement in the state of the world economy can be found in the
global Purchasing Managers Index, which returned in July to the range
reflecting growth at a rate similar to the long-term pace (Figure 26).
The global inflation environment remained low and far from the central
banks’ target rates. In particular, oil prices are significantly lower than
they were a year ago (Figure 28), but core inflation in the main
economies is also low. The global monetary environment remains very
accommodative. Central banks in the advanced economies continue to implement
the special measures announced in view of the crisis, and some of the central
banks in emerging economies, where the monetary interest rate is high, are
continuing to lower their interest rates.
The minutes of the monetary discussions prior to this interest rate
decision will be published on September 9, 2020. The next decision regarding
the interest rate will be published at 16:00 on Thursday, October 22, 2020,
and will be followed by a press briefing with the Governor.​
​​​