Home Page
Communication and publications
Press Releases
The Monetary Committee decides on January 9, 2020 to keep the interest rate unchanged at 0.25 percent
The Monetary Committee decides on January 9, 2020 to keep the interest rate unchanged at 0.25 percent
Back
The Monetary Committee decides on January 9, 2020 to keep the interest rate unchanged at 0.25 percent
The Monetary Committee decides on January 9, 2020  to keep the interest rate unchanged at 0.25 percent
09/01/2020
Share:
The inflation environment remains
low. The November CPI was lower than expected, and inflation over the past 12
months is 0.3 percent. Inflation excluding energy and fruits and vegetables indicates
a lower basic inflation rate than in previous months. In the coming months,
inflation is expected to stay low, but most one-year expectations and forecasts
remained near the lower bound of the target range.
Since the previous interest
rate decision, the shekel has been relatively stable against the dollar, while
most other currencies strengthened against the dollar. However, during 2019,
the shekel strengthened by 8.3 percent in terms of the nominal effective
exchange rate, a development that continues to make it difficult to return inflation
to the target range.
Most indicators of economic
activity point to continued solid growth in the fourth quarter, and the labor
market remains tight. However, the interim budget is expected to have a markedly
contractionary effect in the first half of 2020, and there is continuing
uncertainty regarding budgetary policy thereafter. According to the Research
Department’s staff forecast, growth is expected to slow somewhat in 2020.
Global economic activity
continues to slow, but it seems that the risks of a significant deterioration have
declined in view of progress in the trade negotiations between the US and China
and the results of the UK elections. Inflation remains low, but it appears that
the process of enhanced monetary accommodation by the major central banks has
reached its limit at this stage.
The Monetary Committee's assessment is
that in view of the inflation environment in Israel, the monetary policies of
major central banks, developments in the global economy and the risks to the
domestic economy, and the development of the exchange rate, it will be
necessary to leave the interest rate at its current level for a prolonged
period or to reduce it in order to support a process at the end of which inflation
will stabilize around the midpoint of the target range, and so that the economy
will continue to grow strongly. Furthermore, the Committee is taking additional
steps as necessary to make monetary policy more accommodative. The Bank of
Israel continues to monitor developments in inflation, the real economy, fiscal
policy, the financial markets, and the global economy, and will act to attain
the monetary policy targets in accordance with such developments.
For the file of figures accompanying this notice, click here.​
The inflation environment remains low. The CPI reading for November
declined by 0.4 percent, a greater decline than expected, so that year over
year inflation remained below the target range. In the past 12 months,
inflation was 0.3 percent (Figure 1 in the attached file of figures), and
inflation excluding energy and fruit and vegetables stabilized at a low level,
which may indicate a lower basic inflation rate than in previous months (Figure
2). Inflation of nontradable goods prices remained moderate, in view of the
slowdown in the increase of the housing component, and inflation in the prices
of tradable goods remained negative, in view of the decline in energy prices
and the appreciation of the shekel. Inflation is expected to remain low in the
coming months, but most one-year forecasts and expectations remain around the
lower bound of the target range (Figure 4). The Research Department’s
staff forecast indicates that inflation in 2020 is expected to be 1 percent,
0.2 percent lower than in the previous forecast. Expectations derived from CPI financial
contracts appear to have declined moderately in recent months. Medium-and
long-term forward inflation expectations derived from the bond market remained
largely stable since the previous interest rate decision, and have increased
slightly in recent days (Figure 5). Since the previous interest rate
decision, the shekel was relatively stable against the dollar, while most
currencies strengthened against the dollar. However, over the course of 2019,
the shekel strengthened by 8.3 percent in terms of the nominal effective
exchange rate (Figure 6), which continues to make it difficult to return
inflation to the target range.
Most indicators of economic activity show that in the fourth quarter,
the economy continued to grow solidly. This is substantiated by the Business
Tendency Survey for December and the Companies Survey for the fourth quarter (Figure
13), the Composite State of the Economy Index for November (Figure 14),
and the Purchasing Managers Index. Goods exports were flat in October and
November, while services exports continued to grow rapidly in October (Figure
15). In contrast, the Consumer Confidence Index declined in October and in
November. The labor market remains tight: The unemployment rate remained low,
while the employment and participation rates increased (Figure 17), and
wage increases continue despite a moderate decline in the job vacancy rate and
a halt in the increase in employee posts. The interim budget is expected to
have a markedly contractionary effect in the first half of 2020, even in view
of the path of government debt repayment, and uncertainty remains regarding
budgetary policy thereafter and its implications for economic activity and
inflation. According to the Research Department’s staff forecast, growth is
expected to slow somewhat in 2020 as a result of the continued slowdown in
world trade and the budgetary contraction. GDP is expected to grow by 2.9
percent, of which about 0.3 percentage points is due to the one-off effect of
the start of natural gas production from the Leviathan field. In 2021, GDP is
expected to grow by 3.2 percent.
Equity indices in Israel were relatively stable since the previous
interest rate decision, despite equity market increases abroad. Long-term government
bond yields declined since the previous interest rate decision, in contrast
with the continued increase in yields in Europe and the US (Figure 8).
Home prices continued to increase moderately, and in the past year they
have increased by 2.6 percent. The number of home purchases increased, led by
first-home purchasers. Mortgage volume continued to expand, and mortgage
interest rates continued to decline.
The global economy continues to slow, but several indicators point to a
possible moderate improvement in the coming months. Forecasts by investment
houses were stable regarding global growth in 2020 and 2021, following a long
period of downward revisions in growth forecasts (Figure 20). With the
exception of the United States, most fourth quarter country statistics indicated
a continued slowdown in the growth rate, with the main weakness focused on
manufacturing. The slowdown in world trade continues (Figure 21), but
the risk of a significant worsening has declined in view of progress in trade
negotiations between the US and China and the results of the UK election.
Inflation remained lower than the central banks' guiding targets (Figure 23),
but it appears that the process of enhanced monetary accommodation by the major
central banks has reached its limit at this stage. In the financial markets, the
price increases in equity indices have continued (Figure 26). In the US,
the Federal Reserve kept the federal funds rate unchanged, and signaled that
the rate is expected to remain at its current level unless there is a
significant change in the state of the economy. Growth surprised to the upside
in the fourth quarter as well, and the trade agreement that is taking shape
with China may contribute to a recovery in manufacturing. In Europe, growth
remains moderate, mainly in Germany and Italy, and the manufacturing sector
continues to weigh on activity. The ECB left its interest rate unchanged, and is
expected to leave its policy in place for a long time. In Japan, leading
indicators point to a slowing of growth in the fourth quarter, after the
increase in VAT. Data on activity in China were positive, but the long-term
trend of moderation continues. Oil prices increased in view of a reduction of
supply and an expected increase in demand (Figure 24).
The minutes of the monetary discussions prior to this interest rate
decision will be published on January 23, 2020. The next decision regarding the
interest rate will be published at 16:00 on Monday, February 24, 2020.