Home Page
Communication and publications
Press Releases
The Monetary Committee decides on July 6, 2020 to keep the interest rate unchanged at 0.1 percent
The Monetary Committee decides on July 6, 2020 to keep the interest rate unchanged at 0.1 percent
Back
The Monetary Committee decides on July 6, 2020 to keep the interest rate unchanged at 0.1 percent
In addition, the Monetary Committee decided to launch a program for purchasing corporate bonds in the secondary market.
06/07/2020
Share:
In addition, the Monetary Committee decided to launch a program for
purchasing corporate bonds in the secondary market, renew the program to
increase the supply of credit to small and micro businesses, and create an
infrastructure for increasing the variety of assets that the banks can provide
as collateral against this program.  A
press release on these measures is being published separately.​
v
The process of removing
restrictions has led to an improvement in economic activity, but the level of
activity remains low. The increase in the number of new cases of corona in
recent weeks is weighing upon the economic recovery process.  The removal of restrictions led to an
increase in supply, but the level of demand in the economy remains low.  According to the Research Department’s
assessment, the scope of the economic shutdown has narrowed from about 36
percent of activity at the height of the crisis to about 12 percent.  The Research Department’s assessment is that
the economy will contract by about 6 percent in 2020, assuming that there is no
further worsening of the restrictions on activity.  An analysis conducted by the Research
Department shows that between 650,000 and 720,000 workers remain unemployed,
either on unpaid leave or dismissed from their workplace, due to the corona
crisis.
v
The difficulty in halting
the pandemic in various countries, and the delay in the return to routine
economic activity are weighing on the recovery of the global economy, and the
international financial institutions have sharply lowered their growth forecasts.
The governments of many countries are operating wide-scale assistance programs
in order to moderate the negative impact of the crisis and incentivize economic
activity. Following the recovery from the peak of the crisis, the capital
markets remain volatile, and are supported by unprecedented measures taken by central
banks around the world.
v
The main share indices on
the Tel Aviv Stock Exchange declined in line with the S&P500 at the start
of the crisis, but the recovery  has been
more moderate than in other indices around the world. Corporate bond spreads have
also started to widen again recently.
v
The Business Tendency
Survey indicates some moderation in companies’ difficulty in obtaining credit,
but the constraint remains greater than it was prior to the crisis.  The volume of bank credit issued during the
crisis was higher than it was during the same period last year, particularly
regarding credit to medium and large businesses and housing credit. Data on the
fund for government-backed credit to small businesses indicate high demand for
credit.
v
The shekel strengthened
since the last interest rate decision by about 1.2 percent in terms of the
nominal effective exchange rate. The exchange rate is making the recovery of
exports difficult, particularly in view of the decline in global demand, and is
weighing on the return of inflation to the target range.
v
There is a continued
downward trend in the inflation environment, with inflation significantly lower
than the lower bound of the target range.
In the coming months, annual inflation is expected to remain
negative.  Forward expectations of
inflation at the end of the second year are slightly below the lower bound of
the target range, while longer-term expectations are anchored within the target
range.
In view of the magnitude of the crisis’s adverse impact on economic
activity, the Committee is utilizing a range of tools in order to increase the
extent of the monetary policy accommodation and to ensure the continued orderly
functioning of the financial markets. The Committee will expand the use of the
existing tools, including the interest rate tool, and will operate additional
ones, to the extent that it assesses that the crisis is lengthening and that it
is necessary in order to achieve the monetary policy goals and to moderate the
negative economic impact created as a result of the crisis.
For the file of figures accompanying this notice, clickhere.
The coronavirus crisis led to an unprecedented contraction in the
scope of economic activity and to a steep increase in the number of jobseekers.
Following the Passover holiday, the government started a gradual process of
removing the restrictions on movement and activity, and this led to an
improvement in economic activity.
However, the level of activity remains low. The increase in corona
infections in recent weeks is weighing down on the economic recovery process.  The removal of the restrictions led to growth
on the supply side of the economy, but the level of demand remains relatively
low, as shown by a number of indicators. Electricity consumption remains low
despite the removal of most restrictions on business activity (Figure 6 in
the attached data file), credit card purchases are about 10 percent lower
than the pre-crisis average (Figure 7), real time surveys conducted by
the Central Bureau of Statistics show improvement in employment alongside a
continued negative impact on revenue (Figures 4–5). The index of
mobility to places of work stabilized in the first half of June at a level that
is still lower than it was prior to the crisis, and declined toward the end of
June despite the fact that no new restrictions had been imposed up to that
point (Figure 8).
According to the Research Department’s staff forecast, the scope of
the economy’s shutdown, which was estimated to be approximately 36 percent of
activity at the peak of the crisis, continued to decline as restrictions were
removed, and is now approximately 12 percent (Figure 3).  Goods exports continued to recover in May
following the sharp decline in March, but remain lower than they were prior to
the crisis. All components of goods imports declined in May, including the
import of raw materials, which was stable in March and April. Services exports declined
sharply in March and April in view of the sharp decline in exports of tourism
and transportation services, and despite continued growth in the export of
business services (Figures 10–11). The Companies Survey indicates a sharp
decline in business sector activity in the second quarter, and the Business
Trends Survey shows only a slight improvement in June compared with April and
May (Figure 2).
Despite the difficulty in precisely assessing the state of the labor market
in view of the wide variance in data from different sources, all the data show
that the recovery in economic activity is only partially reflected in the labor
market.  Following the sharp decline in
employment in March–April, there was an improvement during May, but the pace of
improvement slowed in June.  An analysis
conducted by the Research Department based on real-time surveys by the Central
Bureau of Statistics shows that between 500,000 and 570,000 workers remain on
unpaid leave or were dismissed from their jobs due to the corona crisis, in
addition to about 150,000 workers who were unemployed prior to the crisis.
The Research Department updated its macroeconomic forecast. The growth
forecast for 2020 was revised downward, and GDP is expected to contract by
about 6 percent in view of worsening morbidity data that are increasing the
uncertainty and weighing on the return to routing economic activity, and in
view of developments abroad. In view of the worsening of the growth forecast
for 2020, the forecast for 2021 was revised upward, to 7.5 percent (Figure 1).
In 2020, the government budget deficit is expected to be about 12 percent of
GDP, as a result of the loss of about NIS 55 billion in income due to the
slowdown in activity, and an increase of about NIS 60 billion in expenditures
in order to finance unemployment benefits and assistance measures announced by
the government.
There is a continued downward trend in the inflation environment, with
inflation significantly below the lower bound of the target range. The May CPI
reading declined by 0.3 percent, and negative year-on-year inflation of 1.6
percent was recorded, mainly in view of the significant negative contribution
of the energy component (Figure 12). The year-on-year inflation rate measured
by the CPI excluding energy and fruit and vegetables was -0.5 percent (Figure
13). There is a methodological difficulty in calculating the CPI and in
analyzing the meaning of measured changes in prices so long as the limitations
on economic activity lead to certain goods and services not being consumed and
their prices not being measurable, and due to the change in the composition of
households’ consumption basket. One-year inflation expectations from all of the
sources in June were higher than in May (Figure 15), but developments
during the period were not uniform.
Inflation expectations derived from the capital market declined since
the second week in June, and continued to decline after the publication of the
May CPI reading, while projections by professional forecasters increased
slightly following the CPI publication. In the coming months, year-on-year inflation
is expected to remain negative.  Forward
expectations for inflation at the end of the second year are slightly below the
lower bound of the target range, and expectations for longer terms are anchored
within the target range. Since the previous interest rate decision, the shekel strengthened
by about 1.2 percent in terms of the nominal effective exchange rate. The
exchange rate is delaying the return of inflation to the target range, and making
the recovery of exports difficult.
The Bank of Israel’s activity in the financial markets reduced the
strong volatility in the markets at the outbreak of the crisis, and in
particular, significantly lowered the yield on government bonds and on
corporate bonds. With that, corporate bond spreads again expanded recently (Figures
19–20). The volatility in the equity markets continued. The main indices on
the Tel Aviv Stock Exchange declined in line with the S&P 500 index at the
start of the crisis, but the correction has been more moderate than in other
indices around the world.
The Business Tendency Survey indicates some moderation in companies’
difficulties in obtaining credit, but the constraint remains higher than it was
prior to the crisis.  The volume of bank
credit issued during the crisis was higher than the volume issued during the
same period last year.  Most of the
growth was in credit to medium and large businesses and in housing credit. The
government increased the volume of the fund for the provision of government-guaranteed
credit to small and medium businesses by a further NIS 4 billion.  The total size of the fund is NIS 18 billion,
and requests for credit from the fund totaling about NIS 47 billion have been
received (Figure 23). In addition, a NIS 4 billion fund with greater
backing has begun operating to provide credit to companies at high risk. The
banking system deferred payments for about 530,000 loans, totaling about NIS
6.8 billion to mid-June (Figure 24).
There was an increase in consumer credit taken out by households in May
following a sharp decline in April.
The difficulty in stopping the pandemic in various countries, and the
delay in the return to routine economic activity are weighing on the global
economy.  Global GDP contracted sharply
in the first quarter, particularly in the major economies, and indicators for
April and May point to an even more significant contraction in the second
quarter.  The Purchasing Managers Indices
indicate some recovery, but they remain below 50, which is the range indicating
contraction of economic activity (Figure 27).  The International Monetary Fund, the World
Bank, and the OECD sharply lowered their growth forecasts and forecasts of
world trade (Figure 25) for the next two years, in view of the continued
spread of the pandemic and the slow removal of the closures, so that in 2020,
global GDP is expected to contract more sharply than at any time since the
aftermath of the Second World War, partly due to the spread of the virus to
emerging markets as well.  Following the
recovery from the peak of the crisis, the capital markets have remained
volatile, and are supported by unprecedented measures taken by central banks
around the world. The governments of many countries are operating wide-scale
assistance programs in order to moderate the negative impact of the crisis and
incentivize economic activity.  In view
of the extension of the cut in oil production by OPEC member countries, the
price of oil increased during the period, but remains significantly lower than
it was at the beginning of the year (Figure 29).
​
The minutes of the monetary discussions prior to this interest rate
decision will be published on July 20, 2020. The next decision regarding the
interest rate will be published at 16:00 on Monday, August 24, 2020.​