Home Page
Communication and publications
Press Releases
The Monetary Committee decides on November 22, 2021 to keep the interest rate unchanged at 0.1 percent
Press Releases
Back
The Monetary Committee decides on November 22, 2021 to keep the interest rate unchanged at 0.1 percent
The Monetary Committee decides on November 22, 2021 to keep the interest rate unchanged at 0.1 percent
22/11/2021
Share:
Israel is continuing to enjoy an expansion of
economic activity despite still coping with the COVID-19 virus. However, there
is still some uncertainty regarding economic activity in the medium term,
particularly regarding the state of the labor market, and in view of the risk
of further morbidity cycles in Israel and abroad.
The CPI for October increased by 0.1 percent,
and inflation over the preceding 12 months declined to 2.3 percent. To date, the
only interest rate increases worldwide have been in countries where inflation deviated
markedly from their targets, while inflation expectations in Israel are within our
target range, and based on forecasts by the Bank of Israel Research Department
and by forecasters, the inflation rate is expected to be lower in 12 months
from now.
Following rapid economic growth in the second
quarter, which reflected the process of exiting the crisis, the first estimate
of National Accounts data for the third quarter indicates that economic growth slowed,
to an annual rate of 2.4 percent. However, growth in the past four quarters was
about 6 percent.
During the reviewed period, there was a sharp
appreciation of the shekel. The Bank of Israel has completed the $30 billion
purchasing program that the Monetary Committee announced at the beginning of
the year. However, the Committee emphasizes that this is not an upper bound for
intervention, and that the Bank continues to act taking into account the state
of the economy and the continuation of economic activity.
Labor market data show that the economy is facing
some difficulty returning to the employment and unemployment levels that were
typical of the precrisis period. While the broad unemployment rate declined to
about 7 percent in October, the employment rate remained stable.
Home prices increased by about 10 percent in
the past 12 months, a high rate compared to previous years. The annual rate of
increase of rental prices remained relatively moderate.
In the global economy, the trend of recovery
continues, but there are increasing signs of a slowdown in the growth rate. The
global inflation environment remains high and continues to increase, although
the central banks and forecasters in the major economies do not expect a
significant portion of the increase to persist. Accordingly, monetary
tightening around the world is continuing.
The Bank of Israel will complete its purchases
of government bonds in the markets during December, which will bring to an end the
bond market intervention programs that were announced during 2020.
The Israeli economy’s process of recovery from
the crisis continues. However, there are still challenges to economic activity.
The Committee will therefore continue to conduct an accommodative monetary
policy for a prolonged time, in accordance with the pace of growth, employment,
and the path of inflation. This is in order to continue supporting the
attainment of the policy targets and the recovery of the economy from the
crisis, and to ensure the continued orderly functioning of the financial markets.
For the file of figures accompanying this notice, click here.​​
​Israel is continuing to enjoy an expansion of
economic activity despite still coping with the COVID-19 virus. However, there
is still some uncertainty regarding economic activity in the medium term,
particularly regarding the state of the labor market, and in view of the risk
of further morbidity cycles in Israel and abroad.
Since the previous interest rate decision,
there has been some slowdown in the rate of increase in inflation (Figure 1).
The CPI for October increased by 0.1 percent—less than expected—following a 0.2
percent increase in September. Inflation in the past 12 months was 2.3 percent
in October (2.1 percent net of energy and fruit and vegetables; Figure 2).
The year over year rate of increases in the prices of nontradable components
continues its upward trend, while the year over year rate of increase of prices
of tradable components declined in October (Figure 3). The upward trend
in one-year inflation expectations from all sources continues, with
expectations within the target range. However, there is a marked gap between
expectations derived from the capital market, which are near the upper bound of
the target range, and those of the professional forecasters and the banks,
which are lower (Figure 4). Medium- and long-term expectations increased
during the reviewed period, and are within the target range (Figure 5). The
Monetary Committee continues to closely monitor these developments, and
maintains its assessment that there is no concern of an inflationary outbreak. Since
the previous interest rate decision, the shekel strengthened by 4.4 percent
against the US dollar, by 5.7 percent in terms of the nominal effective
exchange rate, and by 6.4 percent against the euro (Figure 6).
After the rapid expansion of the economy in the
second quarter, reflecting the process of exiting the crisis, the first
estimate of National Accounts data for the third quarter indicates that
economic growth slowed to an annual rate of 2.4 percent (Figure 13). The
slowdown in growth was affected by declines in exports and government
consumption, and by volatility in vehicle imports. However, growth over the
past four quarters was approximately 6 percent (Figure 14). In addition,
since the beginning of the year, there has been an accelerated increase in tax
revenues. According to the Central Bureau of Statistics Business Tendency
Survey, the overall net balance of the business sector in October increased,
and is now at a level similar to its precrisis level (Figure 15). Goods
exports (excluding ships, aircraft, and diamonds, in US dollars) declined
slightly in October. However, they remained higher than the prevalent precrisis
level. Services exports moderated slightly in August, but are at a high level (Figure
18). Goods imports are continuing their upward trend, and are at high
levels in all components (Figure 20).
Labor market data show that the economy is facing
some difficulty returning to the levels that were typical of the precrisis
period. While the broad unemployment rate declined to about 7 percent in
October (Figure 21), this was due to a decline in the number of COVID-19
absentees (furlough), while the rate of those unemployed remained stable. At
the same time, there was a decline in the number of participants in the labor
force (for reasons other than COVID-19), so that there was no increase in the
employment rate itself. Following the rapid increase in the first half of the
year, the adjusted employment rate (for those aged 15+) has ranged around 59
percent from the second half of July to the end of October, reflecting a gap of
about 150,000 employed persons compared with the average employment rate in
2019. Alongside the lack of increase in actual employment, the number of job
vacancies continued to increase, to about 143,000 in October (Figure 23).
The increase encompasses many industries, notably those hard hit by the crisis
(food and hospitality) and those where demand remains high (such as
communications). The excess demand for labor has thus far not been reflected in
an increased pace of growth in the average wage (Figure 26). Recently there
has been increasing certainty regarding wages thanks to the “package deal” that
regulates future wage increases in broad parts of the economy.
Home prices increased by about 10 percent in
the past 12 months (Figure 10), a high pace compared to previous years. The
volume of mortgages taken out in October was lower than the peak figures of the
previous months, but it remains high, further to the high mortgage volumes
since the beginning of the year (Figure 11). Alongside these, the annual
rate of increase in rental prices remained relatively moderate.
In the domestic capital market, equity prices
continue to increase, more than recorded in the main equity indices abroad (Figure
35). Government bond yields and corporate bond spreads declined and are at
low levels (Figure 9). The credit market continues to function well, with
stable and low interest rates. The Central Bureau of Statistics Business
Tendency Survey shows that financing difficulties among businesses of various
sizes remain at levels similar to those prior to the crisis (Figure 12).
In response to the COVID-19 crisis, the Bank of Israel utilized special policy
tools. The economy’s recovery from the crisis makes it possible to end the
corporate and government bond purchase programs in December. These programs
helped with the orderly functioning of the markets, the strengthening of the
transmission from monetary policy to the credit market, the reduction of the
interest rate at which companies raised credit in the capital market, and the allocation
of additional sources to credit for all industries.
The global economy continues its trend of
recovery. However, the level of global GDP remains lower than that derived from
the precrisis forecasted growth path, and there are increasing signs of some
slowdown in the growth rate. Various investment houses revised their growth
forecasts slight downward for the US and China (Figures 27). The global Purchasing
Managers Index continues to indicate economic expansion, particularly in the
services sector (Figure 29). The volume of world trade moderated, but
remains at relatively high levels of activity (Figure 28). The main
equity indices increased sharply and corporate bond spreads remained low. The disruptions
in the production and supply chains continue, but oil prices fell and shipping
costs declined slightly during the reviewed period, which may signal the start
of a change. The global inflation environment continued to increase and remains
high. In some countries, the inflation indices are increasing to levels higher
than their central bank targets, but the central banks and forecasters in the
major economies do not expect a significant portion of the increase to persist
(Figure 31). With this, monetary tightening around the world continues. In
the US, there was a further increase in inflation, to a year-over-year level of
6.2 percent, third quarter growth was lower than in previous quarters, and the
labor market continues to recover gradually. The Federal Reserve left the
federal funds rate unchanged, and announced a contraction in its bond purchasing
program. In Europe, there was an increase in morbidity, and some countries
began imposing restrictions that may slow the growth rate. Inflation continues
to increase, and the ECB left its interest rate unchanged. In China, the growth
rate was low, and the slowdown in economic activity continued, particularly in
industrial production. There were interest rate increases in a number of
countries where inflation markedly deviated from the central bank target (Figure
32).
The
minutes of the monetary discussions prior to this interest rate decision will
be published on December 6, 2021. The next decision regarding the interest rate
will be published at 16:00 on Monday, January 3, 2022, followed by a
press briefing by the Governor.
​
​​
This page was last updated on: 23/03/2023