Home Page
Communication and publications
Press Releases
The Monetary Committee decides on May 31, 2021 to keep the interest rate unchanged at 0.1 percent
The Monetary Committee decides on May 31, 2021 to keep the interest rate unchanged at 0.1 percent
Back
The Monetary Committee decides on May 31, 2021 to keep the interest rate unchanged at 0.1 percent
The Monetary Committee decides on May 31, 2021 to keep the interest rate unchanged at 0.1 percent
31/05/2021
Share:
The rapid recovery of
economic activity continues as the COVID-19 pandemic subsides in Israel. The
deterioration in the security situation that lasted approximately 10 days
apparently had only a limited negative impact. The significant increase in
consumption continued even in the industries that were particularly hard hit by
the restrictions during the COVID-19 crisis.
The broad unemployment rate
declined to 9.6 percent, and since the exit from the third lockdown in
February, the modified employment rate has increased. Alongside this, some of
the data indicate difficulties in the labor market’s recovery process: the
number of job vacancies continues to rise, alongside an increase in employers’
difficulty in recruiting new workers in some industries.
According to the first
estimate of National Accounts data for the first quarter, GDP contracted by an
annual rate of 6.5 percent, but first quarter data reflect a complex picture.
In the first half of the quarter, the economy was under lockdown in view of
peak morbidity rates from the pandemic, while the end of February and March
featured a rapid exit from the crisis and recovery of the economy. First
quarter GDP data were significantly impacted by vehicle imports that had been
brought forward to the end of 2020 because of changes in tax rates, and by the shift
of the timing of government expenditures on public consumption. Overall, the
composition of uses shows a positive picture of the state of the economy.
Home prices increased by a
relatively rapid rate of 4.5 percent in the past 12 months. Investors’ share of
total home purchase transactions increased. However, the rate of increase of
rental prices remained moderate.
The inflation environment
remains low, but is in an upward trend. The CPI increased by 0.3 percent in April,
and inflation in the past 12 months is 0.8 percent. According to assessments,
the inflation rate is expected to reach the target range following the
publication of the CPI reading for May. Inflation expectations for the coming
year from all sources continued to increase, and are within the inflation
target range. Medium- and long-term inflation expectations also increased, and are
anchored at the midpoint of the target range.
Since the previous interest
rate decision, the shekel strengthened by 0.4 percent against the US dollar,
and weakened by 0.5 percent in terms of the nominal effective exchange rate and
by 1 percent against the euro. The deterioration in the security situation led
to a short-lived increase in volatility.
The vaccination campaign
around the world is accelerating and supporting economic activity, but at the
same time, there has been a worsening of morbidity in a number of emerging
economies. Investment houses’ growth forecasts for most of the major economies
were revised upward. The prices of agricultural commodities, metals, and oil
increased, and contributed to the continued increase in inflation. Monetary
policy at the major central banks remains very accommodative.
The return to normal life in Israel supports
rapid growth in the coming year. However, there are still challenges to economic
activity in view of the health risks in Israel and abroad and the impact to the
economy, particularly the labor market. The Committee will therefore continue
to conduct a very accommodative monetary policy for a prolonged time, using a
range of tools as necessary, including the interest rate tool, in order to continue
supporting the attainment of the policy targets and the recovery of the economy
from the crisis, and to ensure the continued orderly functioning of the
financial markets.
For the file of figures accompanying this notice, clickhere.​
The rapid recovery of economic activity continues as the COVID-19
pandemic subsides in Israel. However, there remains concern over the
development of mutations that are resistant to the vaccinations or that would
lead to more serious morbidity among the unvaccinated population, which
constitutes a risk to the economy and to maintaining the almost full routine
that the economy enters at the beginning of June. The deterioration in the security
situation that lasted about 10 days apparently had only a limited impact on the
economic recovery process. The duration of the hostilities was relatively
short, and as a result of the COVID-19 crisis, large parts of the economy have
acclimated to remote work and consumption. In addition, a significant portion
of the economic impact during similar incidents in the past was to tourism
services exports, while such exports were already low due to the COVID-19
crisis.
The available indicators regarding economic activity show a continued
trend of improvement. The level of consumption through credit card transactions
returned to, and even crossed, the trend line that was expected prior to the
crisis (Figure 4). During the conflict, there was a transitory decline
in credit card expenditures, but these expenditures recovered rapidly. The
significant increase in consumption continued even in the industries that were particularly
hard hit by the restrictions during the COVID-19 crisis (restaurants, tourism,
leisure services, and education). Alongside the growth in domestic consumption,
the increase in internal tourism is still not sufficient to compensate for the
absence of incoming tourism. The hotels industry is still suffering from the significant
adverse impact. Prior to the confrontation, the indices of mobility to stores
increased to the highest level since the start of the pandemic. Mobility to
work places has not yet returned to its precrisis level, both because
employment has not yet completely recovered, and also due to the adoption of
remote work arrangements at many workplaces (Figure 5). The Central
Bureau of Statistics (CBS) Consumer Confidence Index increased sharply prior to
the conflict, mainly due to the sharp improvement in the components of
expectations of the state of the economy in the coming year. According to the CBS
Business Tendency Survey for April, the aggregate net balance of the business
sector continues its upward trend (Figure 3). In addition, according to
the CBS's most recent real-time survey, the adverse impact on business revenue
in March was the lowest since the start of the crisis.
Labor Force Survey data for the first half of May indicate a decline
in the broad unemployment rate to 9.6 percent (Figure 8). Since the exit
from the third lockdown in February, there has been an increase in the modified
employment rate (according to which those absent due to COVID-19-related
reasons are not considered employed), and according to data from the first half
of May, the rate is 57 percent. (The rate was about 61 percent in 2019.) (Figure
9). Alongside this, some of the data indicate difficulties in the labor
market’s recovery process. The number of job vacancies continues to climb (Figure
10), and employers’ difficulties in recruiting workers has also increased. According
to the Business Tendency Survey, there was a significant increase in the rate
of manufacturing companies reporting difficulty in recruiting nonprofessional workers,
to about 20 percent (Figure 11). Alongside this, it is possible that
some of the difficulties are temporary due to the sharp and rapid exit from
COVID-19-related restrictions to a full activity routine.
According to the first estimate of National Accounts data for the
first quarter, GDP contracted by an annual rate of 6.5 percent (Figure 1).
The decline in that quarter was significantly impacted by vehicle purchases
being brought forward to the end of 2020 because of tax changes, and by the shift
of the timing of government expenditures on public consumption. According to a
Research Department estimate, the contraction in GDP net of the decline in vehicle
imports was only 3.2 percent. First quarter data reflect a complex picture. In
the first half of the quarter, the economy was under lockdown in view of peak
morbidity rates from the pandemic, while the end of February and March featured
a sharp exit from the crisis and recovery of the economy. An examination of the
components of uses shows a positive picture of the state of the economy. Private
consumption excluding durable goods, investments in machinery and equipment,
and exports all increased strongly (Figure 2).
Services exports remained unchanged in recent months, but there is
still an apparent continued upward trend, and its level is higher than it was
prior to the crisis, despite the fact that tourism exports remain low. Data on
goods exports increased slightly in April and are remaining stable, following
volatility during the crisis (Figure 6). Data on goods imports
stabilized in April but remained high (Figure 7). As a result of the
continuing ramifications of the COVID-19 crisis, there is a lack of equipment
and raw materials, which is leading to difficulties in global economic
activity. According to the Business Tendency Survey, this difficulty is having
a particular impact on activity in the manufacturing and construction
industries in Israel. The increase in orders for consumer goods and imports of
goods for manufacturing, combined with the lack of manpower and storage space
at the ports, are leading to difficulties in supply chains.
Home prices increased by a relatively rapid rate of 4.5 percent in the
past 12 months (Figure 22), in view of the moderation in the pace of
building starts and building completions. In addition, there was an increase in
construction input prices. Investors’ share of total home purchase transactions
increased. At the same time, the pace of increase in rental prices remained
moderate. New mortgage volume in April 2021 was NIS 8.3 billion, further to the
high mortgage volumes since the beginning of the year (Figure 23).
The inflation environment remains low but the upward trend in the
inflation rate continues. The CPI for April increased by 0.3 percent. Inflation
in the past 12 months was 0.8 percent (0.5 percent net of energy and fruit and
vegetables) (Figure 14), and according to assessments, it is expected to
reach the target range following the publication of the May CPI reading. The
prices of tradable goods increased sharply, in view of the increase in energy
prices, while the rate of change in the prices of nontradable components of the
CPI remained moderate (Figure 15). Inflation expectations increased against
the background of the rapid recovery in economic activity and the accommodative
policy, the increases in the prices of raw materials, the increase in maritime
shipping costs, and the increase in the global inflation environment. Inflation
expectations for the coming year from all sources continued to increase, and are
within the target range. In particular, expectations derived from the capital
market and from inflation contracts are near the midpoint of the range (Figure
16). Medium- and long-term expectations also increased, and are anchored at
the midpoint of the target range (Figure 17).
Since the previous interest rate decision, the shekel strengthened by 0.4
percent against the US dollar, and weakened by 0.5 percent in terms of the
nominal effective exchange rate and by 1 percent and against the euro (Figure
18). The security escalation led to only a short-lived increase in
volatility.
In the capital markets, the upward trend in equity prices continues
and corporate bond spreads remained unchanged at a level close to their
precrisis level (Figure 21). The yields on CPI-indexed government bonds
declined, while the yields on nominal bonds increased. The credit market
continues to function well with stable and low interest rates, supported by a range
of steps taken by the Bank of Israel and the Ministry of Finance (Figures
24–25). According to the Business Tendency Survey, in March and April,
there was a mixed trend in firms’ difficulty in obtaining credit. There was an
increase in the difficulty in obtaining credit among small businesses, while
large businesses reported a decline in this difficulty. There was stability
among all company sizes in obtaining nonbank credit. From an industry
standpoint, the average level of difficulty in obtaining credit returned to its
precrisis level in all industries except hotels, where there was a sharp
decline in the difficulty in March, but companies are still reporting
relatively high levels of difficulty in obtaining credit.
Globally, the pace of vaccinations is accelerating and supporting
economic activity. However, there was a worsening of morbidity in a number of
emerging economies. Investment houses’ growth forecasts for most of the major
economies were revised upward (Figure 26). The consolidated global Purchasing
Managers Index for April increased to its highest level in the past decade (Figure
28), and the expansion of activity was reflected in both the services and
manufacturing components. The major equity indices were characterized by a
mixed trend during the period, but remain at record high levels (Figure 38).
The pricing of some financial assets may not necessarily reflect all of the
risks. The prices of agricultural commodities, metals, and oil increased, in
view of the supply limitations and increased demand, and contributed to the
continued increase in inflation, but inflation expectations remained near the
central bank targets. Monetary policies at the major central banks remained
very accommodative. In contrast, the interest rate increases in the emerging
economies continue in view of the increase in inflation. In the US, the rapid
economic growth continues and the sentiment indices point to continued rapid
improvement in activity. Despite this, the employment report indicated a
slowdown in the pace of job additions. In Europe, economic activity contracted
in the first quarter of the year, but the acceleration in the pace of
vaccinations in the population, alongside the decline in morbidity and
expectations of the launch of a fiscal program in the second half of the year
led to improved sentiment indices and an upward revision of the growth
forecasts. The Chinese economy continues to expand, but the expansion has
slowed to close to its precrisis pace.
The minutes of the monetary discussions
prior to this interest rate decision will be published on June 14, 2021. The
next decision regarding the interest rate will be published at 16:00 on Monday,
July 5, 2021, followed by a press briefing by the Governor.
​​
This page was last updated on: 19/12/2022