After a continued rise in
inflation since the beginning of 2018, the inflation rate is stabilizing slightly
above the lower bound of the target range, and is expected to remain within the
target in the coming months as well. One-year expectations and forecasts from
the various sources hover around the level of one percent. Medium-term
expectations remained entrenched within the target range. The rise in wages in
the economy and the expansionary fiscal policy will support the continued entrenchment
of inflation within the target. The main risk to this is the possibility of a
sharp appreciation of the shekel.
An analysis of the data and
of updated indicators of economic activity leads to the assessment that the
economy is converging to its potential growth rate. In the second and third
quarters, there was some slowdown in the economy’s growth rate, but current
indicators of activity support the assessment that the economy is at full
employment, and in particular, the tight labor market data indicate a high
level of demand.
The US economy remains
robust, though the risks due to the worsening “trade war” and the heightened political
risk in Europe continue to weigh on momentum. The IMF revised its growth
forecast downward for most countries and regions, and the moderation in world
trade continues. Emerging economies are relatively stable. The gradual
normalization process of monetary policy worldwide continues, but policy
remains accommodative in most economies. In financial markets, there were
marked declines in most equity indices.
Since the previous interest
rate decision, the shekel weakened by 3.6 percent in terms of the nominal
effective exchange rate and by 3.2 percent vis-à-vis the dollar.
Home prices stabilized in
recent months. The number of transactions and mortgage volume appear to be
stabilizing, with a slight increase in mortgage interest rates.
Even after an [RATE REDACTED] , monetary policy remains accommodative
and will continue to support the attainment of policy targets. The Committee
assesses that the rising path of the interest rate in the future will be
gradual and cautious.
The Bank of Israel continues to monitor developments in inflation,
the real economy, the financial markets, and the global economy, and will act
to attain the monetary policy targets in accordance with such developments.
For the file of data accompanying this notice, click here.​
Ecxel file (Hebrew)​
Inflation is stabilizing slightly above the lower bound of the target
range. After a continued rise in actual inflation since the beginning of 2018,
the annual inflation rate has ranged between 1.2–1.4 percent in the past five
months, and the “adjusted indices” are in a similar environment (Figure 2 in
the attached data file). Inflation in tradable goods prices moderated,
primarily as a result of a slowdown in the annual rate of increase in energy
prices, despite the increase in oil prices until recently and the depreciation
of the shekel. Inflation in prices of nontradable items, which serves as an
approximation of the domestic component of inflation, resumed its rise (Figure
3). In the coming months as well, inflation is expected to remain slightly
above the lower bound of the target, and 1-year expectations and forecasts from
the various sources range around a level of one percent. Expectations for
medium terms remained entrenched within the target range, though there has been
a slight decline recently in longer-term expectations. In the intermeeting
period, the shekel weakened by 3.6 percent in terms of the nominal effective
exchange rate (Figure 6). The wage increases in the economy and the
expansionary fiscal policy will support the entrenchment of inflation within
the target range. The main risk to this is the possibility of a sharp appreciation
of the shekel. The steep decline in oil prices in recent weeks may offset the
factors supporting inflation, but its impact on the “adjusted indices” will be
limited. [DECISION REDACTED] In the past month, there
was a slight increase in the yield spreads between corporate bonds and comparable
government bonds.
Based on National Accounts data, there was some slowdown in the
economy’s growth rate (Figure 11) in the second and third quarters. The growth
rate in the third quarter was 2.3 percent. Private consumption grew moderately,
and investment continued to contract, despite the firming of residential
construction investment after it had declined over several quarters. Services
(excluding start-up companies) exports returned to growth, while weakness
continued in goods (excluding diamonds) exports (Figure 12). However, an
analysis of the data and of updated indicators of activity—and considering the
impact of volatility in vehicle imports on GDP—indicates that the economy is apparently
converging to its potential growth rate. The Composite State of the Economy
Index (Figure 13), the Purchasing Managers Index and the Consumer
Confidence Index (Figure 14), and the Business Tendency Survey of the
Central Bureau of Statistics all support this assessment, as do labor market
data. The unemployment rate remains very low, though the participation and
employment rates appear to be moderating from the elevated levels they had
reached. The ratio of job vacancies to total employee posts rose to a record
level (Figure 17), and wages continue to increase (Figure 18),
led by a relatively sharp rise in the business sector, encompassing a wide
range of industries and all salary levels.
Home prices have stabilized in recent months (Figure 9). The
most recent data indicate that the number of transactions is apparently
steadying, after some increase in the beginning of the year. New mortgage
volume is stabilizing after increasing since 2017, and mortgage interest rates have
increased slightly in recent months, against the background of the increase in
government bond yields (Figure 10).
The macro picture conveyed by the global economy continues to indicate
declining momentum. The US economy remains robust, though the risks due to a
worsening of the “trade war” and heightened political risk in Europe continue
to weigh on momentum. The IMF revised its growth forecast downward for most countries
and regions (Figure 19), and the moderation in world trade continues (Figure
20). Global monetary policy remains accommodative, but the direction is
gradually changing—while negative interest rates and below-target inflation
continue in Europe and Japan, federal funds rate increases in the US are
expected to continue and the central banks of several additional countries raised
interest rates. Likewise, global quantitative easing wound down, and in the
coming months quantitative contraction is expected to begin, in view of the Fed
contracting its balance sheet and the cessation of purchases by the ECB (Figure
24). In financial markets, there were marked declines in most equity
indices (Figure 25), and bond spreads widened. In the US, as noted, the
high growth continued, driven by private consumption and the improvement in
manufacturing activity, while the fiscal expansion’s impact is expected to dissipate
in 2020. In Europe, growth weakened in the third quarter. Assessments are that
it is not a change in trend, although leading indicators point to a loss of momentum.
The tension between the Italian government and European authorities grew
stronger, following the proposed budget that is expected to lead to an increase
in the deficit in Italy. In Japan, growth was negative in the third quarter,
apparently due to one-off factors, and improvement is expected in the next quarter.
Emerging markets are relatively stable, but a possible worsening of the “trade
war” and the effects of the monetary contraction in advanced economies continue
to weigh on continued growth. Growth in China continues to weaken. There was a turnaround
in oil prices, which are declining sharply (Figure 22). The growth in
supply is apparently the main factor, but there are also forecasts for a
decline in global demand.
The minutes of the monetary discussions prior to this
interest rate decision will be published on [DATE]. The next
decision regarding the interest rate will be published at 16:00 on Monday, [DATE], following which the Governor will hold a press briefing.