The inflation environment is
above the lower bound of the target range, and recently it has increased
slightly, with the economy being at a full employment environment. Since the
beginning of the year, most CPI readings have surprised to the upside. The
inflation rate over the preceding 12 months has been 1.5 percent, and it
currently seems less likely that inflation will again fall below the lower
bound of the target range. Most one-year inflation expectations and forecasts
are slightly above the lower bound of the target range, and forward
expectations for medium and longer terms remained near the midpoint of the
target.
In the past year, the
shekel has strengthened by 4.3 percent in terms of the effective exchange rate.
In the intermeeting period, the shekel was relatively stable vis-à-vis the
dollar and the euro, and depreciated slightly in terms of the nominal effective
exchange rate. If the appreciation resumes, it is expected to delay the
continued increase of the inflation rate toward the midpoint of the target.
For several quarters, the
economy has grown at around the potential rate. The moderation in the growth
rate of private consumption appears consistent with the exhaustion of the
process of expansion in the labor market. Some indicators of second quarter
growth point to moderation, but others show that growth is continuing at a
solid pace. Labor market data indicate that it remains tight.
The risks to the global
economy remain significant, and the forecasts for world trade and growth in most
regions were revised downward. The expectation in global financial markets is
that major central banks will renew the process of monetary accommodation.
The Committee assesses that the rising
path of the interest rate in the future will be gradual and cautious, in a
manner that supports a process at the end of which inflation will stabilize around
the midpoint of the target range, and that supports economic activity. The Bank
of Israel continues to monitor developments in inflation, the real economy,
fiscal policy, the financial markets, and the global economy, and will act to
attain the monetary policy targets in accordance with such developments.
Graphs and data​
The inflation environment is above the lower bound of the target range,
and recently it increased slightly, with the economy being at a full employment
environment. The CPI for May increased by 0.7 percent, higher than pre-publication
assessments, and since the beginning of the year most CPI readings have surprised
to the upside. Inflation over the past 12 months was 1.5 percent (Figure 1
in the attached file of figures), its highest level since 2013, with the
volatile fruit and vegetables component making a relatively significant
contribution (Figure 2). Inflation in the prices of nontradable goods,
an approximation of the domestic component of inflation, moderated in recent
months, but remains above the 2 percent level, and inflation in tradable goods
prices continues to increase. Annual inflation is expected to decline slightly
in the coming months, but most one-year inflation expectations and forecasts
are slightly above the lower bound of the target range (Figure 3). The
Research Department's staff forecast projects that inflation over the next four
quarters will be 1.4 percent. Medium-term and long-term forward expectations remained
around the midpoint of the target range. In the past year, the shekel has
strengthened by 5 percent in terms of the nominal effective exchange rate.
However, since the last interest rate decision, the shekel has been relatively
stable against the dollar and the euro, and weakened slightly in terms of the
nominal effective exchange rate (Figure 6). If the appreciation resumes,
it is expected to delay the continued increase of the inflation rate toward the
midpoint of the target.
Equity indices in Israel increased since the previous interest rate
decision, in line with the price increases in most global markets. Government
bond yields declined sharply, similar to global yields (Figure 7). Yield
spreads between corporate bonds in Israel and comparable government bonds declined
slightly.
For the past several quarters, the economy has been growing at near
its potential rate. According to the second estimate of National Accounts data
for the first quarter of 2019, which were revised downward, the economy grew by
4.8 percent, but the growth was affected markedly by volatility in vehicle
imports. The moderation of the growth rate of private consumption seems
consistent with the exhaustion of the expansion process in the labor market (Figure
12). Some indicators of economic activity in the second quarter point to
moderation. The Composite State of the Economy Index for May increased by 0.1
percent, lower than the pace of increase in the past year. Foreign trade data
indicate a continued slowdown in goods exports in May (Figure 15). In
contrast, sentiment data from the Business Tendency Survey show that growth is
continuing at a solid pace, and this is seen as well in (gross) tax revenues. Labor
market data indicate that it remains tight—the unemployment rate continues to
decline, and the latest data on the employment and participation rates show they
declined slightly but remain high (Figure 16).
Wage increases are continuing, led by the business sector (Figure 18). The
job vacancy rate has been declining moderately for several months, but it
remains high. According to the Research Department's staff forecast, GDP is expected
to grow by 3.1 percent in 2019, a slightly lower pace than in the previous
forecast in view of the expected impact of the slowdown in world trade on
exports. In 2020, GDP is expected to grow by 3.5 percent, slightly higher than
the long-term pace, as a result of expected significant activity by several large
companies.  The decision to hold
new elections, and uncertainty regarding the measures the government will adopt
following the elections in order to lower the deficit, increase the uncertainty
regarding developments in the domestic economy.
In recent months, home prices again increased moderately, so that
overall they increased by approximately 1.0 percent in the past year, while
rental prices remained stable in the past two months. The number of
transactions increased markedly among all types of homebuyers. Over the past
four quarters, the downward trend in building starts appears to have halted. The
trend of expansion in mortgage volume continues, and mortgage interest rates continued
to decline moderately.
The risks to the global economy remain significant, mainly in view of
the "trade war", political risk in Europe and in the Persian Gulf,
and the concern of a slowdown in China. Forecasts of world trade and of growth
for most regions were revised downward (Figure 19), the slowdown in
world trade continues (Figure 20), and in contrast to the trend in
recent years, the pace of growth in trade is expected to be lower than the
growth rate of global output. In the financial markets, equity indices increased
(Figure 25), and government bond yields declined sharply, in view of the
expectation that the process of monetary accommodation by major central banks will
resume. In the US, the Federal Reserve left the federal funds rate unchanged, but
its announcement was interpreted as a signal that it is expected to begin implementing
an accommodative policy due to intensifying risks and a decline in inflation
expectations. In Europe, the economic picture continues to indicate weakness, and
industrial production continues to contract. The ECB left its interest rate
unchanged, but clarified that "all policy tools are on the table", and
noted that there is no expectation of an interest rate increase until at least
the midpoint of 2020. In Japan, there was growth in the first quarter supported
by net exports, although leading indicators point to weakness in domestic
demand and in the manufacturing sector. Growth in China is expected to continue
to moderate, and the authorities continue to adopt measures to support growth. Oil
prices declined since the previous interest rate decision, in view of the continued
increase in supply from the US and despite increased geopolitical risk (Figure
23).
The minutes of the monetary discussions
prior to this interest rate decision will be published on [DATE]. The
next decision regarding the interest rate will be published at 16:00 on Wednesday,
[DATE].
​​