​The fourth wave of the COVID-19 virus in Israel
is abating.  The economy’s handling of
this morbidity wave did not include serious restrictions on activity.  However, there is still a great extent of
uncertainty regarding economic activity in the medium term, mainly in view of
the risk of cyclicality of additional morbidity waves.
The available indicators of economic activity
show that even at the peak of morbidity during the fourth wave, there was no
significant decline in activity or in demand.
The Research Department revised its staff
forecast upward.  Its assessment is that
GDP will grow by 7 percent in 2021, and by 5.5 percent in 2022.
Labor Force Survey data for the first half of
September indicate stability in the unemployment rate.  The number of job vacancies continued to
increase, further to the trend since the beginning of the year, and the
shortage of workers continues to weigh on the expansion of activity.
The upward trend in inflation continues.  Inflation in the past 12 months is 2.2
percent.  One-year inflation expectations
from all sources increased, and are within the target range.  According to the various forecasts, the pace
of inflation is expected to moderate later on.
Since the previous interest rate decision, the
shekel weakened by 0.5 percent against the dollar.  The shekel strengthened by 1.1 percent
against the euro, and by 0.3 percent in terms of the nominal effective exchange
rate.
Home prices increased by about 8 percent in the
past 12 months, a more rapid pace than in previous years.  The pace of increase in rental prices
remained relatively moderate.  There is a
prolonged marked decline in building completions.
The global economy continues to recover in view
of the moderating morbidity rates and the increase in vaccination rates.  However, it seems that momentum has weakened
due to difficulties in the global production chain and the increase in energy
prices that are increasing existing inflation risks.  Some of the central banks have started to
gradually reduce their monetary accommodation.
The Israeli economy’s process of recovery from
the crisis continues.  However, there are
still challenges to economic activity. [DECISION REDACTED] 
Continued economic activity and sound growth will make it possible to
end the various quantitative easing programs in the coming months. This is all
in order to continue supporting the attainment of the policy targets and the
recovery of the economy from the crisis, and to ensure the continued orderly
functioning of the financial markets.
The fourth wave of the COVID-19 virus in Israel
is abating, with a decline in morbidity rates, contagion coefficients, and the
number of seriously ill patients. The economy dealt with this wave differently
than with previous ones, and the process did not include severe restrictions on
activity. This was made possible partly due to the vaccinations, and it seems
that the third (booster) shot of the vaccine is also having a positive effect. The
ability to conduct on-going economic activity alongside the COVID-19 virus can
also be seen in the encouraging economic growth data. However, there is still a
great deal of uncertainty regarding economic activity in the medium term,
mainly in view of the risk of cyclicality of additional waves of morbidity.
The available indicators of economic activity
show that despite the increase in morbidity, there was no significant decline
in activity or in demand. Total credit card purchases declined moderately in
August, following the expansion of restrictions, but increased again, rapidly,
in September (Figure 4). There
was a significant increase in purchases in the restaurants and domestic tourism
industries (Figure 5). According to the Central Bureau of Statistics
Business Tendency Survey, the total net balance of the business sector in September
declined slightly, but remained at a high positive level (Figure 2). Goods
exports (excluding ships, aircraft, and diamonds, in dollars) declined slightly
in August, but remained higher than they were prior to the crisis. Services
exports continued to trend upward (Figure 6). Goods imports also continued
to trend upward, and are at high levels in all components (Figure 7).
The Bank of Israel Research Department updated
its macroeconomic forecast. Its assessment is that GDP will grow by 7 percent
in 2021, and by 5.5 percent in 2022 (Figure 1). The adjusted employment
rate will increase throughout the forecast period, to 59.5 percent at the end
of 2022. The broad unemployment rate is expected to be about 5.2 percent at the
end of the period, compared with an average level of 3.8 percent in 2019. The
inflation rate is expected to be 2.5 percent in 2021, but looking at the next
four quarters, inflation is expected to gradually moderate to 1.7 percent. In
addition, assuming that the State budget is passed as planned and that the
fiscal adjustment will be pushed off to 2023 and onward, the debt to GDP ratio
is expected to be 73.5 percent in 2021 and 73 percent in 2022.
Since the exit from the third lockdown, there
has been an increase in the adjusted employment rate (according to which
COVID-19-related absentees are not considered employed), and a decline in the
broad unemployment rate. The improvement follows a reduction in support for
COVID-19-related unemployed. However, since August, the improvement in the
employment indices has slowed. Labor Force data for the first half of September
(aged 15+) indicate stability in the broad unemployment rate at 7.9 percent (Figure
8) and
in the adjusted employment rate at 58.7 percent, while the latter was 61.1
percent in 2019, prior to the crisis (Figure 9). This represents a gap of about 168,000
employees (2.4 percentage points) compared with the average employment rate in
2019. The number of job vacancies continues to increase, further to the trend
since the beginning of the year (Figure 10). This phenomenon is typical
of other advanced economies that have experienced a rapid growth in
unemployment due to governmental furlough policies that led to new job
vacancies being created with the easing of restrictions and the rapid growth of
GDP, which were filled relatively slowly. This may indicate a higher structural
unemployment rate. According to the Business Tendency Survey, the shortage of
workers continues to weigh on the expansion of activity, particularly in the
hotels, manufacturing (professional employees), and services industries (Figure
11).
The upward trend in inflation continues. The
CPI reading for August was up by 0.3 percent, and inflation in the past 12
months is 2.2 percent (1.9 percent net of energy, fruits and vegetables; Figure
14). Inflation of the prices of nontradable components continues to trend
upward, while the inflation rate of prices of tradable goods remained stable (Figure
15). The upward trend in one-year inflation expectations from all sources
also continues, but expectations are within the target range. However, there is
a marked gap between expectations derived from the capital market and those of
the professional forecasters and the banks, which are lower (Figure 16).
Medium-range expectations increased, and long-term expectations remained
anchored at the midpoint of the target range (Figure 17). The Monetary
Committee is closely monitoring these developments, and maintains its
assessment that there is no concern of an inflationary outbreak.
Since the previous interest rate decision, the
shekel weakened by 0.5 percent against the US dollar, while it strengthened by 1.1
percent against the euro, and by 0.3 percent in terms of the nominal effective
exchange rate (Figure 18).
Home prices increased by about 8 percent in the
past 12 months (Figure 22)—a faster rate than in previous years—and the
decline in building completions continues (Figure 23). In July, there
was some moderation in the volume of transactions among all types of
purchasers, but their level remained high. The volume of new mortgages taken
out in August was similar to previous months, further to the high volume of new
mortgages since the beginning of the year (Figure 24). Alongside this,
the pace of increase in rental prices remains relatively moderate.
In the capital market, equity prices increased
during the reviewed period, in contrast with the global trend, and corporate
bond spreads declined slightly (Figures 36 and 21). Yields on 10-year government
bonds in Israel increased by about 25 basis points, similar to the global trend
(Figure 19). The credit market continues to function well, with stable
and low interest rates (Figures 26 and 27). The Central Bureau of
Statistics Business Tendency Survey examination of financing difficulties among
large businesses continues to show similar levels to those prior to the crisis
(Figure 25).
The global economy continues to recover in view
of the moderating morbidity rates and the increase in vaccination rates. However,
it seems that the momentum has weakened due to difficulties in the global
supply chain and higher energy prices that are increasing the existing
inflation risks. There was no material change in the investment houses’
forecasts of the expected global growth rate, but broken down into blocs, there
was a decline in the forecasts for the US and Japan and an increase in the
forecasts for Europe and the emerging economies (Figure 28). The global
purchasing managers indices moderated, but continue to indicate economic
expansion (Figure 30). The volume of world trade moderated as well, but
remains at high levels of activity. The major stock indices in the US and
Europe declined. The prices of oil and natural gas increased significantly
during the period. The global inflation environment remains high (Figure 31),
but the baseline assessment of the central banks in leading economies and of
the capital markets is that a significant portion of the increase is not
expected to persist (Figure 32). Inflation indices in many countries are
high, and in some of them the index has surpassed the inflation target. In the
US, the Federal Reserve left the interest rate and purchasing program
unchanged, but signaled a reduction of the purchasing program in the near
future, and brought forward the forecast for the first increase in the interest
rate to the end of 2022. In the eurozone, the ECB left the interest rate
unchanged, but slowed its purchasing program. In the UK, in view of the
increased inflation risk, the Bank of England signaled a future rate increase. In
China, there was a slowdown in economic activity, particularly industrial
production. Likewise, there were interest rate increases in a number of countries
that are experiencing considerable inflationary pressures.
The
minutes of the monetary discussions prior to this interest rate decision will
be published on [DATE]. The next decision regarding the interest rate
will be published at 16:00 on Monday, [DATE].
​​​