​The rapid recovery of economic activity continues.  The economy is almost completely open, and as
of now, there are not material restrictions on economic activity.  However, since mid-June, we have been
witnessing an increase in the number of confirmed cases of COVID-19, as a
result of the spread of the “Delta Variant”.
At this stage, the morbidity level is low, but the spread of the disease
poses some risk to the continued recovery of the economy.
The broad unemployment rate declined to 9.5 percent, and the
employment rate excluding COVID-19 absentees increased slightly.  However, job vacancies as a share of total
positions has stabilized at a high level.
The Research Department’s assessment is that GDP will grow by
5.5 percent in 2021, and by 6 percent in 2022, such that the level of GDP at
the end of 2022 is expected to be only about 0.5 percent lower than the level
that was expected prior to the crisis.
Home prices increased rapidly, by 5.6 percent in the past 12
months.  However, the pace of rental
price increases remains moderate.
The upward trend in the pace of inflation continues.  Inflation in the past 12 months has entered
the target range, and is now 1.5 percent.
Inflation expectations for the coming year continued to increase, and are
within the target range.  Inflation
expectations for the medium and long terms declined slightly, but remained
anchored at the midpoint of the target range.
Since the previous interest
rate decision, the shekel weakened by 1.1 percent against the US dollar, and
strengthened by 0.6 percent in terms of the nominal effective exchange rate and
by 2.2 percent against the euro. [DECISION REDACTED] 
The return to normal life in Israel
supports rapid growth in the coming year. However, there are still challenges
to economic activity in view of the health risks in Israel and abroad and the
impact to the economy, particularly the labor market. [DECISION REDACTED] 
The economy is almost completely open, and other than a restriction on
the entry of nonresidents to Israel and certain restrictions on Israelis
traveling abroad, there are no material restrictions on economic activity as of
now.  As such, the rapid recovery of
economic activity continues.  However,
from mid-June, we have seen an increase in the number of COVID-19 patients as a
result of the spread of the “Delta Variant”.
At this stage, the morbidity level is low, but the spread of the disease
poses some risk to the continued recovery of the economy, mainly to businesses
that rely on foreign tourists.
The available indicators regarding economic activity show a
continuation of the recovery that began with the exit from the third lockdown,
but the levels of activity, and particularly of employment, remain lower than
their levels prior to the crisis. Since April, credit card expenditures have
been in line with the long-term trend.
The trend of recovery in consumption is reflected in the industries that
were significantly hard-hit by the restrictions (Figure 3).   The mobility indices to work places declined
slightly, while the mobility indices to stores, vacations, and retail outlets
continue to increase.  In addition, total
industry revenue in April increased beyond the trend that was expected prior to
the crisis (Figure 5).  The upward trend
in services exports continued in April, and its level is higher than what it
was prior to the crisis, despite the fact that tourism exports remain low.  Data on goods exports indicate a slight decline
in May, but have remained stable over recent months, following volatility
throughout the crisis (Figure 6).  Goods
imports increased in May, and are at a high level (Figure 7).
Labor Force Survey data for the second half of June indicate a further
slight decline in the broad unemployment rate, to 9.5 percent (Figure 9).  The employment rate is in an upward trend,
though at a more moderate pace than in previous months.  Since the exit from the third lockdown, there
has been an increase in the adjusted employment rate (according to which
COVID-19 absentees are not considered employed), to 56.6 percent in May, while
the rate was 61 percent in 2019, prior to the crisis. In the first half of
June, there was a further small improvement in employment (Figure 11). The
number of employed persons in May was about 300,000 below potential according
to the trend forecast prior to the crisis. The gap from the forecast trend was
the narrowest since the beginning of the crisis.  The industries in which there is a reported
lack of employees are the restaurants and tourism industries, which were
particularly hard-hit by the crisis, and the construction industry, where the
lack of workers may be due to a slowdown in demand for labor, which in turn is
in line with the slowdown in the pace of building starts.  The number of job vacancies continues to
increase moderately, and the job vacancy rate as a share of positions has
stabilized at a high level (Figure 12).
The Bank of Israel Research Department revised its macroeconomic staff
forecast for the coming two years.  In
its assessment, GDP will grow by 5.5 percent in 2021 (Figure 1).  The broad unemployment rate is expected to
decline to 8 percent of the labor force at the end of 2021.  In 2022, GDP is expected to grow by 6
percent, so that the level of GDP at the end of 2022 is expected to be only
about 0.5 percent lower than the level that was expected prior to the crisis.  The unemployment rate is expected to continue
declining in 2022, and to reach about 5.5 percent by the end of the year, still
higher than the precrisis level.
Assuming that the State budget passes as planned and that the fiscal
consolidation will be pushed off to 2023 and thereafter, the debt to GDP ratio
during these years is expected to be 74 percent.
Home prices increased by 5.6 percent in the past 12 months (Figure 25),
a rate that is more rapid than in previous years, with an increase in the
number of home purchases and reflecting the moderating numbers of building
starts and building completions.  In
addition, the prices of construction inputs increased.  With that, the pace of rental price increases
remained moderate.  Mortgage volume was
NIS 9.5 billion in May, further to the high mortgage volumes since the
beginning of the year. (Figure 26).
The upward trend in the pace of inflation continued. The CPI for May
increased by 0.4 percent, and inflation in the past 12 months entered the
target range, and is now 1.5 percent (1 percent net of energy, fruits and
vegetables; Figure 16).  The increase in
tradable goods prices continued, in view of the increase in energy prices.  The prices of nontradable components also
increased, particularly those that have been impacted by the removal of
restrictions, such as culture, recreation and leisure (Figure 17).  Inflation in Israel excluding energy and food
is drawing closer to the OECD median (Figure 18).  In view of the rapid recovery of economic
activity, the accommodative policies around the world, and the increase in the
global inflation environment, one-year inflation expectations continued to
increase, and are within the target range.
In particular, expectations derived from the capital market and from
inflation forecasters are at the midpoint of the target range (Figure 19).
Inflation expectations for the medium and long terms declined slightly, but
remained anchored at the midpoint of the target range (Figure 20).  The Monetary Committee is closely monitoring
these developments, and it estimates that there is no concern of an outbreak of
high inflation.
Since the previous interest rate decision, the shekel weakened by 1.1 percent
against the US dollar, and strengthened by 0.6 percent in terms of the nominal
effective exchange rate, and by 2.2 percent against the euro (Figure 21).
In the capital market, share prices and corporate bond spreads
remained largely unchanged.  Corporate
bond spreads are similar to their precrisis levels (Figure 24).  The yields on government bonds also remained
stable.  The credit market continues to
function well with stable and low interest rates (Figures 29 and 30).  According to the Central Bureau of Statistics
Business Tendency Survey, credit restraints returned to their precrisis levels
in all industries except the hotels industry.
An examination of the financing difficulty among large and medium
businesses also indicates a return to precrisis levels. Among small businesses,
there was a further improvement reported in May, with a decline in the level of
difficulty in obtaining bank credit, which is drawing close to the 2019 level
(Figure 28).
To combat the impact of the COVID-19 crisis, the Bank of Israel implemented
dedicated policy tools to support the proper functioning of the markets,
strengthen the transmission of monetary policy, and increase the supply of
credit to small and micro businesses.
These measures included an outline for deferring loan repayments to the
banking system for households and businesses, a reduction of capital
requirements at the banks, a loan program to the banking system against credit
to small businesses, bond purchases by the Bank of Israel, and more.  With the removal of restrictions and the
recovery of the economy, there is less need for the specific program to provide
long-term loans to the banking system against loans to be issued to small and
micro businesses, and the operation of this tool will be halted.  The layer through which loans were provided
to the banks at a [RATE] interest rate ended as planned in June, and the
layer of loans at [RATE] interest will end on October 1 or once a total of
NIS 40 billion has been utilized.  The
Bank of Israel is constantly examining the market conditions, and continues to
use the other special tools for the crisis as necessary.
Globally, vaccinations in developed countries have reached a high
rate, and morbidity is in a downward trend, which allowing the removal of
restrictions on economic activity.  Global
growth forecasts for 2021 by the World Bank and the investment houses were
revised upward (Figure 31) in view of the fiscal program approved in the US,
the vaccination campaign, and the acclimation to economic activity under restrictions.  The global Purchasing Managers’ Index
continues to increase, indicating economic expansion, and for the first time
since the outbreak of the COVID-19 crisis, the index for the services sector
indicates a higher level than for the manufacturing sector.  The volume of world trade continued to
increase in recent months.  Equity
indices continue to increase, although the pace of price increases was
relatively moderate.  The pricing of some
financial assets may not necessarily reflect all risks.  There were increases in oil prices, while
there were declines in the commodity indices during the recent period.  The global inflation environment continues to
increase, but long-term inflation expectations moderated (Figure 34).  Monetary policy in the major economies
remained very accommodative.  The central
banks left their interest rates unchanged and did not change their purchasing
programs. However, in a small number of markets, mainly developing markets,
where there are marked inflationary pressures, there were increases in the
interest rates. The US is leading the global economic recovery, as a result of
the rapid inoculation, the removal of restrictions, and a broad fiscal
program.  In Europe as well, sentiment
data indicate an acceleration of economic activity.  However, in the UK, the continued opening of
the economy was delayed in view of an increase in morbidity.  The recovery in China continues, but its pace
slowed.
The minutes of the monetary discussions prior to this interest rate
decision will be published on [DATE]. The next decision regarding the
interest rate will be published at 16:00 on Monday, [DATE].​​