There was a recovery of economic activity in November and
December following the exit from the second lockdown, but the variance of the
adverse effect between the various industries continues, and the increase in
morbidity led the government to announce a third lockdown.  As of now, the restrictions are lighter than
those imposed in the previous lockdowns.
The direct weekly cost of the third lockdown in its current format,
compared with a state of full economic activity, is estimated at about NIS 2.5
billion.
The broad unemployment rate, which reached about 23 percent
during the second lockdown, declined to about 12.7 percent in the first half of
December, but is expected to again increase in view of the third lockdown.  The impact on employment is greater in
industries that are characterized by low wages.
The Research Department’s forecast outlines two potential
scenarios that are influenced by the pace of inoculation of the
population.  In the rapid inoculation
scenario, GDP is expected to grow by 6.3 percent in 2021, and by 5.8 percent in
2022.  In the slow inoculation scenario,
growth is expected to be 3.5 percent in 2021 and 6 percent in 2022.  In view of the fast pace of inoculations so
far, it seems that the rapid inoculation scenario is more likely to come about
than the slow inoculation scenario.
The inflation environment remained low.  The CPI for November declined by 0.2 percent,
and inflation in the past 12 months is -0.6 percent (-0.2 percent net of
energy, fruits and vegetables).  One-year
inflation expectations from the various sources remained below the lower bound
of the target range.  Forward
expectations from the second year onward are within the target range.
Since the previous interest rate decision, the shekel
strengthened by 1.5 percent in terms of the effective exchange rate, by 2.8
percent against the US dollar, and by 0.6 percent against the euro.  So far, it seems that exports are growing
despite the appreciation, but at some point, the exchange rate may have a
nonlinear effect on exports, and continued appreciation is expected to lead to
a further slowing of inflation.
The credit market continues to function with stable and low
interest rates, supported by a variety of measures taken by the Bank of Israel
and the Ministry of Finance.  Bank credit
to the business sector increased in recent months, and the increase in housing
credit also continued.  However,
according to the Business Tendency Survey, the difficulty in raising credit
remains higher than it was prior to the crisis, mainly among small businesses.
The global economy is recovering, but there is continued
uncertainty in view of the start of inoculation campaigns while morbidity
continues to spread. A high level of variance is expected in the growth of
various economies in 2021, and some countries are not expected to completely
recover from the crisis even in 2022, mainly if there are further outbreaks of
the virus and the pace of inoculations is slow.
The monetary policies of the major central banks remains very
accommodative.
The fast pace of the inoculation process in Israel increases the
optimism regarding a rapid return of the economy to a path of growth in the
coming year. However, the risks to economic activity remain high, and the
adverse impact on the economy, and particularly on the labor market, is
expected to be prolonged. [DECISION REDACTED] The Committee will expand the use of the existing tools, including the
interest rate tool, and will operate additional ones, to the extent that it
assesses that it is necessary in order to achieve the monetary policy goals and
to moderate the adverse economic impact resulting from the crisis.
Even before the economy managed to complete its exit process from the
second lockdown, the increase in morbidity led the government to announce a
third lockdown.  As of now, the
restrictions are looser than those imposed during the previous lockdowns.  In particular, the education system continued
its pre-lockdown activity routine.  The
Research Department’s assessment is that under the current circumstances, the
direct weekly cost of the third lockdown compared with a state of full economic
activity is about NIS 2.5 billion.  The
Knesset dispersed without passing the state budget for 2021. Alongside this,
the earlier-than-expected start of the inoculation campaign and the rapid pace
of vaccinations thus far in Israel are expected to support economic recovery
later in the year.
The available indicators regarding economic activity in November and
December show recovery of economic activity throughout the gradual exit from
the second lockdown, but the variance of the impact between the industries
continues.  With the opening of
street-front stores at the beginning of November, there was a jump in credit
card purchases, and since then, the level has been slightly higher than it was
prior to the crisis (Figure 3 in the attached data file).  Mobility data indicate a return to activity
at workplaces and markets.  Goods exports
(excluding ships, aircraft, and diamonds, in dollars) recovered, and were
higher in October and November than they were prior to the crisis. Services
exports (excluding tourism) continue to grow strongly (Figure 4).  All components of goods imports (in dollars)
also increased by high rates in November, to volumes slightly higher than they
were prior to the crisis (Figure 5).  The increase in the Current Account surplus
continued in the third quarter, with an increase in the surplus in the services
account and a reduction of the deficit in the goods account.
The broad unemployment rate, which reached approximately 23 percent during
the second lockdown, decline to about 12.7 percent in the first half of December,
but is expected to again increase in view of the third lockdown (Figure 7).  The impact on employment was higher in the
industries that are characterized by low wages (Figure 8). Central
Bureau of Statistics real-time surveys indicate an increase in the volume of
business closures in the economy.  The
rate of business closures increases the smaller they are, as does the rate of
those dismissed from the business.
In view of the dispersal of the Knesset without passing the state
budget for 2021, and in order to prevent large-scale cutbacks in government
activity, the government increased the budget base for 2020 so that the interim
budget in 2021 will be less restraining than was previously expected.  The overall government deficit (excluding the
provision of credit) at the end of 2020 is estimated at about 12 percent of
GDP.
The Bank of Israel Research Department revised its macroeconomic
forecast for the coming two years, and estimates that the contraction of GDP in
2020 will be about 3.7 percent (Figure 1).  The revised forecast features two potential
scenarios that are influenced by the pace of inoculation of the population.  In view of the start of the inoculation
campaign, both scenarios are more positive than the forecast published in
October.  In the rapid inoculation scenario,
in which toward the end of the second quarter the government no longer places
significant restrictions on economic activity for health reasons, GDP is
expected to grow by 6.3 percent in 2021, and the broad unemployment rate is
expected to decline during the year to 7.7 percent of the labor force in the
fourth quarter of 2021. In 2022, GDP is expected to grow by 5.8 percent, the
unemployment rate is expected to continue to decline to 5.4 percent, and the
debt to GDP ratio is expected to be 75 percent.  In the slower inoculation scenario, which will
last until the middle of 2022, GDP is expected to grow by 3.5 percent in 2021,
and the broad unemployment rate is expected to decline to about 11
percent.  In 2022, GDP growth is expected
to be 6 percent, while unemployment is expected to decline to 7 percent, and the
debt to GDP ratio in 2022 is expected to be 82 percent.  In view of the fast pace of inoculation, it
seems that currently, the rapid inoculation scenario is significantly more
likely to play out than the slow scenario.
The inflation environment remained low. The CPI for November decline
by 0.2 percent, and inflation in the past 12 months was -0.6 percent (-0.2
percent net of energy and fruit and vegetables) (Figure 10). In the
coming months, annual inflation is expected to remain negative. Inflation
expectations for the coming year from the various sources increased slightly
but remain below the lower bound of the target range. Expectations derived from
the capital market continued to increase, partly in view of the increase in
commodities and oil prices. Forward expectations from the second year onward
remained virtually unchanged, and are within the target range. Medium- and long-term
expectations remained anchored within the target range (Figure 13).
Since the previous interest rate decision, the shekel strengthened by
1.5 percent in terms of the nominal effective exchange rate, by 2.8 percent
against the US dollar, and by 0.6 percent against the euro.  So far, it seems that exports are growing
despite the appreciation, but at some point, the exchange rate could have a
nonlinear effect on exports, and continued appreciation is expected to lead to
a further slowdown of inflation (Figure 14).
Home prices increased by 2.5 percent in the past year, while the pace
of increase was more moderate in recent months.
The volume of transactions in the housing market is lower than in the
precrisis period, and there was a marked slowdown in building starts.  The Banking Supervision Department directive
cancelling the limitation on the Prime-linked component of mortgages is
expected to lower the effective interest rate on such loans (Figure 21).
The credit market continues to function with stable and low interest
rates, supported by a variety of measures taken by the Bank of Israel and the
Ministry of Finance.  However, according
to the Business Tendency Survey, the difficulty in raising credit remains greater
than it was prior to the crisis, mainly among small businesses (Figure 22).  There was a marked slowdown in November in total
loan repayment deferrals in the banking system.
At the same time, the deferral period ended for about 60 percent of the
total loans that were deferred in view of the crisis.  There was a positive trend in the domestic
capital market, as share indices in Tel Aviv increased, similar to the global
trend, and corporate bond spreads continued to narrow.
The global economy is recovering, but the uncertainty continues in
view of the start of inoculation campaigns while morbidity continues to spread.  A high level of variance is expected in the
growth of various economies in 2021, and some countries are not expected to
completely recover from the crisis even in 2022, mainly if there are further
outbreaks of the virus and the pace of inoculations is slow (Figure 25).  The high morbidity levels have led to a
slowdown in the services sector, mainly in Europe, while the improvements in
manufacturing and in world trade continue.
Share prices in the capital markets continued to increase in view of the
start of inoculation campaigns, with slight increases in US treasury bond yields.
The increases of oil and industrial commodity
prices continue but inflation is expected to remain low and the monetary
policies of the major central banks remain very accommodative.  In the US, a fiscal incentive program was
approved and the growth forecasts were revised upward, but private consumption
and labor market data point to moderation in activity.  In Europe, the increase in morbidity is
expected to lead to a contraction of activity in the fourth quarter, and growth
forecasts for 2021 declined again. The agreement between the European Union and
the UK reduced the political uncertainty.
In Japan, despite the increase in morbidity, real-time indicators point
to improvement.  The economic improvement
in China continues in view of the improvement in consumer sentiment and the
increase in demand for exports.
The minutes of the monetary discussions prior to this interest rate
decision will be published on [DATE]. The next decision regarding the
interest rate will be published at 16:00 on Monday, [DATE].
​​​